{{character info/new}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=60|rad=彳|as=08|sn=11|four=26241|canj=HOAMI|ids=⿰彳㝵}}

===References===
* {{Han ref|kx=0367.310|dkj=10137|dj=0691.160|hdz=20828.030|uh=5F97|ud=24471|bh=B16F|bd=45423}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|alt=𠭁,𧴫,㝵}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etym}}
{{liushu|ic}}. The ancient form of {{lang|zh|得}} is {{zh-l|*㝵}}, composed of {{zh-l|*貝|cowry}} + {{zh-l|*又|hand}} — to pick up a cowry > to obtain valuables. A component {{zh-l|*彳}} was sometimes added to show that the cowry was picked up on the road.

In the seal script:
* the {{zh-l|*貝}} corrupts into something resembling {{zh-l|*見}}, which further corrupts into {{zh-l|*旦}} in clerical script;
* the {{zh-l|*又}} is replaced with the related {{zh-l|*寸}}.

===Pronunciation 1===
{{zh-pron
|m=dé
|m-s=de2
|c=dak1
|c-t=
|g=
|h=pfs=tet
|j=
|md=dáik
|mn=tit/xm,zz,tw:tek/qz:tiak
|mn_note=tit - vernacular; tek/tiak - literary
|mn-t=
|w=4teq
|x=
|mc=y
|oc=y
|ma=y
|cat=v,a,part
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# to [[get]]; to [[obtain]]; to [[gain]], to [[acquire]]
#: {{zh-x|他 得{dé} 了 個 壞 名聲。|He gained a bad reputation.}}
# to [[contract]] (disease); to become [[ill]] with
# to [[result]] in; to [[produce]]
# to be [[ready]]; [[finished]]
# to [[suit]]; to [[fit]]
# [[fit]]; [[proper]]
# [[satisfied]]; [[contented]]
# {{n-g|used before verbs to express possibility and permissibility, usually used in the negative}}
# {{anchor|enough}}{{n-g|interjective particle expressing approval or prohibition; see {{lang|zh|[[得了#Etymology 3|得了]]}}}}
#: {{zh-x|得{dé} 了，別 再 說 了。|OK! OK! That's enough.}}
# {{n-g|interjective particle expressing frustration or helplessness}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|一得|一索得男|一舉兩得|一舉數得|一蹴而得|不付得|不可得|不得|不消得|乞漿得酒|亡戟得矛|亡羊得牛|但得|佐饔得嘗|何得|佹得佹失|偶得|償得夙願|先馳得點|出手得盧|分得|到得|勒里勒得|動輒得咎|勢不得已|博得|取得|只得|各得其宜|各得其所|唾手可得|啞子得夢|喜得|因禍得福|垂手可得|垂手而得|塞得港|多得|失而復得|奧得河|安得|巴得|幸得|引得|彼得大帝|得一望十|得不償失|得不補失|得不酬失|得主|得了|得人|得令|得以|得似|得來不易|得償所願|得先手|得其三昧|得其所|得其所哉|得分|得利|得到|得力|得勁|得勝|得勢|得勿|得匣還珠|得名|得命|得天獨厚|得失|得婿如龍|得宜|得實|得寵|得寸思尺|得寸進尺|得尺得寸|得差|得年|得幸|得得|得心應手|得志|得悉|得意|得成秦晉|得所|得手|得挹芝眉|得救|得新厭舊|得新忘舊|得新棄舊|得時|得未嘗有|得未曾有|得果|得標|得樣兒|得權重任|得步進步|得民|得沾化雨|得法|得濟|得無|得獎|得理|得用|得當|得病|得益|得知|得神|得票|得福不知|得空|得竅|得第|得缺|得罪|得而復失|得而誅之|得職|得臉|得色|得衷|得親順親|得解|得計|得詔|得逞|得運|得過|得道|得采|得錢賣放|得閒|得間|得隴望蜀|得雄|得雋|得體|得魚忘筌|心安理得|心得|必不得已|志在必得|志得意滿|志滿氣得|患得患失|情非得已|意得志滿|意滿志得|所得|打自得兒|抵得|拔十得五|拔得頭籌|拾得|捷足先得|探驪得珠|敖得薩|既得利益|既得權|旱苗得雨|有一得一|有得|楚弓楚得|樂得|死得其所|毋得|氣滿志得|求仁得仁|求漿得酒|沒可得|浪得虛名|焉得|特利可得|猶魚得水|獲得|王得祿墓|玩不得的|理得辭順|疾足先得|盲者得鏡|直得|相得|硬是要得|萬不得已|種瓜得瓜|種豆得豆|種麥得麥|算得|罪有應得|羝乳得歸|老年得子|聖彼得堡|自得|苟得|莫得|落得|蛟龍得水|見得|談得攏|負所得稅|貪多務得|貪得無厭|買得|賦得|贏得|軒軒甚得|迫不得已|逐兔先得|逼不得已|道得應得|適得其反|適得其所|那得|鑽火得冰|開普威得|難得|馬是得|鴟得腐鼠}}

===Pronunciation 2===
{{zh-pron
|m=de,di
|m_note=di is used in poetry, songs
|c=dak1
|mn=xm,zz:tek/qz:tiak/qz,zz:tit
|mn_note=Quanzhou: tiak - literary; tit - vernacular
|ma=y
|dial=n
|cat=part
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{n-g|Used after a verb or an adjective and before a complement.}}
#: {{zh-x|好 得{de} 很|very good}}
#: {{zh-x|他 痛 得{de} 直 哭。|He is in '''so''' much pain '''that''' he won't stop crying.}}
#: {{zh-x|他 跑 得{de} 快。|He runs fast.}}
#: {{zh-x|他 跑 得{de} 像 一 阵 风。|He runs like wind.}}
#: {{zh-x|看 得{de} 見|able to see}}
#: {{zh-x|他 畫 得{de} 好。|He paints well.}}
#: {{zh-x|賣 得 幾多 錢？|How much '''can''' it sell for?|C|ref={{lang|zh|《{{w|yue:氹氹轉，菊花園|氹氹轉，菊花園}}》}}}}
# {{n-g|Used after a verb to express possibility or capability.}}
#: {{zh-x|吃 得{de}|eatable, edible}}
#: {{zh-x|做 不 得{de}|must not be done}}
#: {{zh-x|這 雙 鞋 穿 得{de}。|These shoes fit well.}}
#: {{zh-x|這 個 人 批評 不 得{de}。|He's not a man to criticize.}}

====Usage notes====
* When it is used between a verb and the complement, and the complement is used to indicate possibility or capacity, the negative form replaces {{lang|zh|得}} with {{zh-l|不}}.
** {{zh-x|寫 得{de} 好|able to write well}}
** {{zh-x|寫 不 好|unable to write well}}
*: If there is no complement, or if the complement describes the result or the extent of the verb, the negative form has {{zh-l|得[[不]]}} in the place of {{lang|zh|得}}.
*:* {{zh-x|寫 得{de} 好|write well}}
*:* {{zh-x|寫 得{de} 不 好|write not well}}
* If it is used after a verb-object construction, the verb is repeated again as "verb-object-verb-{{lang|zh|得}}-complement".
** {{zh-x|寫字 寫 得{de} 好|write characters well}}
*: "Object-verb-{{lang|zh|得}}-complement" is also used.
*:* {{zh-x|字 寫 得{de} 好|characters being well-written}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|免得|不值得|了不得|吃不得|下得去|不捨得|使得|恨不得|吃得開|來得及|不道得|少不得|了得|來得|下得|合得著|天曉得|不曉得|了得了|想得美|悶得慌|免不得|兜得轉|怪不得|怨不得|可了不得|去得|亂得慌|不爭得|來得巧|不見得|不省得|值得|對得起|幹得來|吃得光|不由得|吃得來|巴不得|做得了|使不得|乾落得|做得|受不得|合得來|不到得|吃得|堵得慌|幹得了|想得開|吃得消|吃得住|信得過|不認得|戳得住|玩得轉|沒得主意|犯得著|稱得起|沒得工夫|沒得空兒|打得逼直|瞧得起|捨不得|投至得|擱得住|拿得起|沉得住氣|看得開|瞧不得|曉得|禁得起|看得起|稱得上|禁得|禁不得|禁得住|打得火熱|眼見得|白得發亮|省得|沒得養|當不得|拿得住|由不得|懂得|犯得上|會得|捨得|沒得說的|沒得|撐得住|看得上眼|趕得及|說得著|顧得過來|說得過去|美得冒泡|過得去|站得住|說不得|紅得發紫|覺得|靠得住|說得來|罩得住|行不得|過得著|虧得|顯得|說得響|趕得上|還了得|累得慌|要得|走得開|諒得過|記得}}

===Pronunciation 3===
{{zh-pron
|m=děi
|ma=y
|c=dak1
|dial=n
|cat=v
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{lb|zh|colloquial}} [[need]]
# {{lb|zh|colloquial}} [[must]]; to [[have to]]
#: {{zh-x|我 得{děi} 走 了。|I must go (now).}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|fold=1|必得|就得|便得|非得|總得}}

{{zh-cat|Beginning}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=4|rs=彳08}}

# acquire

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=とく
|kanon=とく
|kun=え-る, う-る
}}

====Derived terms====
* {{ja-r|得る|える}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=득|eumhun=|mr=tŭk|y=tuk|rv=deuk}}

# [[obtain]], [[achieve]]
# [[gain]], [[benefit]]
# [[satisfaction]]
# [[virtue]] (''same as'' [[德]])

====Derived terms====
* [[得失]] ([[득실]], ''deuksil'')
* [[得意]] ([[득의]], ''deugUi'')
* [[利得]] ([[이득]], ''ideuk'')

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[đắc]], [[được]], [[đác]], [[đắt]]|rs=彳08}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=彳08}}