==Translingual==
{{stroke order|strokes=8}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=116|rad=穴|as=03|sn=8|four=3010<sub>1</sub>|canj=十金一 (JCM)|ids=⿱[[穴]][[工]]}}

# [[sky]], [[empty]], [[hollow]], [[bare]], [[void]], [[deserted]]
# {{context|Buddhism|lang=mul}} [[sunyata]]; [[emptiness]], [[vacuity]], [[awareness]], [[openness]], [[oneness]], [[thusness]]
# (''[[Japanese]] [[Buddhism]]'') "[[Wikipedia:Five elements (Japanese philosophy)#Kū|void]]":  One of the {{l|ja|五大}} (''godai''; lit. "''[[great]] [[five]]); also known as {{l|ja|天}} ({{l|ja|そら}}, sora'') and is of particular importance as the highest of the five elements.  It also represents those things that are beyond one's everyday [[experience]]s, particularly those things composed of [[pure]] [[energy]].
## (''Bodily'') represents one's [[spirit]], [[thought]], and [[creative]] energy. It represents one's [[ability]] to [[think]] and to [[communicate]], as well one's [[creativity]]. It can also be associated with power, creativity, [[spontaneity]], and [[inventiveness]].
## (''[[martial art|Martial arts]]'') a [[philosophy]]; when [[exercise]]d, the power of the Void allows one to connect to the [[quintessential]] creative energy of the world. A martial arts [[practitioner]], who is properly attuned into the 'Void', have greater [[visucentric|spatial awareness]] of their surroundings, the [[presence]]s of others, and to act without thinking and without using their physical senses, via this [[mindstate]] of [[inner peace]].

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0863.010|dkj=25415|dj=1289.080|hdz=42719.080|uh=7A7A|ud=31354|bh=AAC5|bd=43717}}

----

==Cantonese==
===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=|y=hung1}}

# {{defn|lang=yue|sort=穴03}}

----

==Japanese==
{{wikipedia|lang=ja}}

===Prefix===
{{ja-pos|k|prefix|hira=うつ|rom=utsu}}

# [[empty]], [[emptiness]]
# empty [[space]], [[spare]] [[room]]

====Derived terms====
* {{ja-l|空蝉||utsusemi}}

===Etymology 1===
/utuho/: utupo > utuɸo > utuwo > utuo. See also {{term|空|lang=ja|tr=utsubo}}.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=うつお|hhira=うつほ|rom=utsuo}}

# empty
# hollow

===Etymology 2===
Similar etymology to {{term|空|lang=ja|tr=utsuo}}. As /h/ gradually changed from [p] > [ɸ] > [w] > [Ø], the phoneme was voiced to [b] in order to maintain it.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=うつぼ|rom=utsubo}}

# empty {{attention|ja|this doesn't sound like a definition for a noun?}}
# hollow

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=そら|rom=sora}}

# the [[sky]]

=====Synonyms=====
* {{sense|the sky}} {{ja-l|天|てん|ten}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=から|rom=kara}}

# [[emptiness]]

=====Derived terms=====
* [[空手]]([[からて]], ''[[karate]]''): lit. "empty [[hand]]" -- a [[Japanese]] [[martial art]]
* {{ja-l||カラオケ|karaoke}}

====Noun====
{{rfc|these don't sound like dictionary definitions|lang=ja}}
{{ja-noun|k|hira=くう|rom=kū}}

# empty air
# (''[[Japanese]] [[Buddhism]]'') One of the {{l|ja|五大}} (''godai''; lit. "''[[great]] [[five]]); also known as {{l|ja|天}} ({{l|ja|そら}}, sora'') and is of particular importance as the highest of the five elements.  It also represents those things that are beyond one's everyday [[experience]]s, particularly those things composed of [[pure]] [[energy]].
## (''Bodily'') represents one's [[spirit]], [[thought]], and [[creative]] energy. It represents one's [[ability]] to [[think]] and to [[communicate]], as well one's [[creativity]]. It can also be associated with power, creativity, [[spontaneity]], and [[inventiveness]].
## (''[[martial art|Martial arts]]'') a [[philosophy]]; when [[exercise]]d, the power of the Void allows one to connect to the [[quintessential]] creative energy of the world. A martial arts [[practitioner]], who is properly attuned into the 'Void', can sense their surroundings, the [[presence]]s of others, and to act without thinking and without using their physical senses, via this [[mindstate]] of [[inner peace]].

=====Compounds=====
* {{ja-l|真空|しんくう|shinkū'}}
* {{ja-l|空気|くうき|kūki}}
* {{ja-l|空霊|くうれい|kūrei}}

====Prefix====
{{ja-pos|k|prefix|hira=から|rom=kara}}

# [[empty]]
#: {{Jpan|'''空'''箱|lang=ja}}
# [[ineffectual]]
#: {{Jpan|'''空'''振り|lang=ja}}
# [[false]]
#: {{Jpan|'''空'''元気|lang=ja}}

====Prefix====
{{ja-pos|k|prefix|hira=むな|rom=muna}}

# empty

=====Derived terms=====
* {{ja-l|空しい||munashii}}
* {{ja-l|空言||munakoto}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=うろ|rom=uro}}

# hollow

====Kanji====
{{ja-kanji|grade=1|rs=穴03}}

=====Readings=====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[くう]] (''[[kū]]''), [[うろ]] (''[[uro]]'')|kun=[[から]] (''[[kara]]''), [[あく]] (''[[aku]]''), [[そら]] (''[[sora]]''), [[すく]] (''[[suku]]''), [[むな]] (''[[muna]]''), [[うつ]] (''[[utsu]]''), [[うつぼ]] (''[[utsubo]]''), [[うつお]] (''[[utsuo]]'')}}

=====Compounds=====
{{top2}}
* {{ja-l|青空||aozora}}
* {{ja-l|青空市場||aozora ichiba}}
* {{ja-l|冬空||fuyuzora}}
* {{ja-l|空っぽ||karappo}}
* {{ja-l|空手||karate}}
* {{ja-l|空オケ||karaoke}}
* {{ja-l|空気||kūki}}
* {{ja-l|空間||kūkan}}
* {{ja-l|空港||kūkō}}
* {{ja-l|空中||kūchū}}
* {{ja-l|空輸||kūyu}}
* {{ja-l|空洞||kūdō}}
{{mid2}}
* {{ja-l|空腹||kūfuku}}
* {{ja-l|空白||kūhaku}}
* {{ja-l|空席||kūseki}}
* {{ja-l|真空||shinkū}}
* {{ja-l|架空||kakū}}
* {{ja-l|虚空||kokū}}
* {{ja-l|航空||kōkū}}
* {{ja-l|航空便||kōkūbin}}
* {{ja-l|空き缶||akikan}}
* {{ja-l|空き瓶||akibin}}
* {{ja-l|空き巣狙い||akisunerai}}
* {{ja-l|空しい||munashii}}
{{bottom}}

====Derived terms====
* {{ja-l|空孫悟空|そんごくう|songokū}}

[[Category:1000 Japanese basic words|そら]]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=[[공]]|eumhun=빌|rv=gong|mr=kong|y=kong|ehrv=bil}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=穴03}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|Zh-kong.ogg|Audio}}

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[kōng]] ([[kong1]]), [[kǒng]] ([[kong3]]), [[kòng]] ([[kong4]])|wg=k'ung<sup>1</sup>, k'ung<sup>3</sup>, k'ung<sup>4</sup>}}

# {{defn|lang=cmn|sort=穴03}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[không]], [[khỏng]], [[cung]], [[khung]]|rs=穴03}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=穴03}}

[[cs:空]]
[[fr:空]]
[[ko:空]]
[[it:空]]
[[lo:空]]
[[la:空]]
[[lt:空]]
[[li:空]]
[[hu:空]]
[[mg:空]]
[[ms:空]]
[[fj:空]]
[[nl:空]]
[[ja:空]]
[[pl:空]]
[[pt:空]]
[[ru:空]]
[[fi:空]]
[[th:空]]
[[tr:空]]
[[zh:空]]