{{also|Appendix:Variations of "du"}}
==Amanab==

===Noun===
'''du'''

# a kind of [[bird]]

[[Category:Amanab nouns]]

----

==Breton==

===Etymology===
From {{proto|Celtic|dubu-|black|lang=br}}, from {{proto|Indo-European|dʰewbʰ-|black|lang=br}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/ˈdyː/|lang=br}}

===Adjective===
{{head|br|adjective}}

# [[black]]
# [[swollen]]
# [[starved]]

===Noun===
{{head|br|noun|g=m}}

# [[black]]

====Mutation====
{{br-noun-mutation|d|u|g=m}}

[[Category:br:Colors]]

----

==Cornish==

===Etymology===
From {{proto|Celtic|dubu-|black|lang=kw}}, from {{proto|Indo-European|dʰewbʰ-|black|lang=kw}}.

===Adjective===
{{head|kw|adjective}}

# [[black]]

[[Category:kw:Colors]]

----

==Danish==

===Etymology 1===
From {{etyl|non|da}} {{term|þú|lang=non}}, from {{proto|Germanic|þū|lang=da}}, from {{proto|Indo-European|túh₂|you|lang=da}}.

====Pronunciation====
* {{IPA|/du/|[d̥u]|lang=da}}

====Pronoun====
{{head|da|pronoun|objective|dig}}

# {{personal}} [[you]] (2nd person singular subject pronoun, informal)

=====See also=====
{{Danish personal pronouns}}

===Etymology 2===
From {{etyl|non|da}} {{term|duga|lang=non}}.

====Pronunciation====
* {{IPA|/duː/|[d̥uːˀ]|lang=da}}

====Verb====
{{head|da|verb|imperative|du|present|dur|or|duer|past|duede|past participle|duet}}

# be [[good]]
# be [[fit]]

----

==Dena'ina==

===Particle===
'''du'''

# interrogative particle (placed at the end of the sentence to make a question)

[[Category:Dena'ina particles]]

----

==Esperanto==
{{cardinalbox|eo|1|2|3|unu|tri|ord=dua|adv=due|mult=duobla}}

===Etymology===
{{etyl|la|eo}} ''[[duo]]'' or {{etyl|lt|eo}} ''[[du]]''

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/du/|lang=eo}}

===Cardinal number===
{{eo-card}}

# {{cardinal|lang=eo}} [[two]] ([[2]])

{{eo BRO|1}}
{{eo GCSE|0}}
{{Universala Vortaro}}

====Derived terms====
* {{l|eo|duo}}

----

==French==

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|Fr-du.ogg|audio}}
* {{IPA|/dy/|lang=fr}}
* {{homophones|dû}}

===Contraction===
{{head|fr|contraction}}

# contraction of [[de]] + [[le]] (''of the'').
# contraction of [[de]] + [[le]], forms the partitive article.
#: The partitive article signifies "[[some]]", but it often is not translated in English, Dutch, or German.

----

==German==

===Alternative forms===
* {{l|de|Du}}

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|goh|de}} {{term|du|lang=goh}}, akin to Old Saxon {{term|thu|lang=osx}} and English {{term|thou|lang=en}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/duː/|lang=de}}
* {{audio|De-du.ogg|audio}}

===Pronoun===
'''du'''

# {{personal|lang=de}} [[you]] (sg., ''informal, friends, relatives'').

====Inflection====
* [[nominative case|Nominative]]: '''du'''
* [[accusative case|Accusative]]: [[dich]]
* [[dative case|Dative]]: [[dir]]
* [[genitive case|Genitive]]: [[deiner]]

The genitive case ''deiner'' is more and more rarely used in modern German.
* While the genitive of personal pronouns does express ownership, it must not be confused with possessive pronouns. While possessive pronouns such as {{l|de|dein}} are put in front of the noun they relate to and follow the inflection rules of adjectives, the genitive form of personal pronouns only has got one from, which is not further inflected. Additionally, personal pronouns in Genitive can be put after the word they relate to.

====Derived terms====
* {{l|de|duzen}}

[[Category:German personal pronouns]]

----

==Gothic==

===Romanization===
{{got-rom}}

# {{got-romanization of|𐌳𐌿}}

----

==Ido==

===Cardinal number===
{{head|io|numeral}}

# {{cardinal|lang=io}} [[two]] (2)

----

==Kurdish==

===Cardinal number===
{{head|ku|numeral}}

# {{cardinal|lang=ku}} [[two]] (2)

----

==Lithuanian==

===Cardinal number===
{{head|lt|numeral|g=m|feminine|dvi}}

# {{cardinal|lang=lt}} [[two]] (2)

====Declension====
{{lt-decl-numeral|du|dvi|dviejų|dviejų|dviem|dviem|du|dvi|dviem|dviem|dviejuose|dviejose}}
{{lt-numeral|du|dvi|dveji|dvejos|dvejetas|dvejeta|antras|antra}}

----

==Lojban==

===Etymology===
Derived from [[dunli]].

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|lang=jbo|/ˈdu/}}

===Cmavo===
{{jbo-cmavo}}<!--{{jbo-cmavo|dub|du'o}}-->

# (''identity selbri'') {{sumti|1}} equals {{sumti|2}}, {{sumti|3}}, {{sumti|4}}, ...
#: ''li pa su'i vo '''du''' li mu''
#:: one plus four equals five

===See also===
* [[dunli]]

----

==Luxembourgish==

===Etymology===
From {{proto|Germanic|þū|lang=lb}}.

===Pronoun===
{{head|lb|personal pronoun}}

# ''second-person singular, nominative'': [[you]]
#: ''Wéi al bass '''du'''?'' &mdash; How old are '''you'''?

====Declension====
{{lb-decl-personal pronouns}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Romanization===
'''du'''

# {{nonstandard spelling of|lang=cmn|sc=Latn|[[dū]]}}
# {{nonstandard spelling of|lang=cmn|sc=Latn|[[dú]]}}
# {{nonstandard spelling of|lang=cmn|sc=Latn|[[dǔ]]}}
# {{nonstandard spelling of|lang=cmn|sc=Latn|[[dù]]}}

====Usage notes====
English transcriptions of Chinese speech often fail to distinguish between the critical tonal differences employed in the Chinese language, using words such as this one without the appropriate indication of tone.

[[Category:Mandarin pinyin]]

----

==Middle Dutch==

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|odt|dum}} {{term|thu|thū|lang=odt}}, from {{proto|Germanic|þū|lang=dum}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|lang=dum|/dyː/|/dy/}}
* {{a|Limburg}} {{IPA|lang=dum|/duː/|/du/}}

===Pronoun===
{{head|dum|pronoun}}

# [[thou]], [[you]] {{gloss|singular, informal}}

====Declension====
{{dum-decl-ppron}}

====Usage notes====
This pronoun began to be replaced by {{term|ghi|lang=dum}} in formal address during the Middle Dutch period, and eventually fell out of use altogether.

====Synonyms====
* {{l|dum|ghi}}

----

==Norman==

===Noun===
'''du'''

# [[duke]]

[[Category:Norman nouns]]

----

==Norwegian==

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|non|no}} {{term|þú|lang=non}}.

===Pronoun===
{{head|no|pronoun|accusative|deg}}

# [[you]] (''familiar sg'')

====References====
* {{R:Dokumentasjonsprosjektet}}

===See also===
{{nb-pers-pron}}
{{nn-pers-pron}}

----

==Old French==

===Alternative forms===
* {{l|fro|del}}

===Contraction===
{{head|fro|contraction}}

# contraction of '''[[de]]''' + '''[[le]]''' (of the)

----

==Old High German==

===Etymology===
{{proto|lang=goh|Germanic|þū}}, whence also Old English ''[[þu]]'', Old Norse ''[[þú]]''.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/du/|lang=goh}}

===Pronoun===
'''du'''

# [[you]] (sing.)

[[Category:Old High German pronouns]]

----

==Romanian==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|[du]|lang=ro}}

===Verb===
'''du'''

# {{ro-form-verb|2s|impr|duce}}
#: '''''Du'''-[[te]] [[acasă]]''.
#:: Go home.

----

==Swedish==

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|Sv-du.ogg|audio}}
* {{IPA|/dʉ/|lang=sv}}

===Pronoun===
{{head|sv|pronoun}}

# {{personal}} [[you]] (''familiar sg.'').
# {{personal}} [[thou]].

====Usage notes====
While ''du'' is the traditionally familiar mode of address, it is since the early '70s the standard in almost all circumstances, possibly capitalized in formal communications.
Recently, use of the second-person plural pronoun ''[[ni]]'' as a less familiar (and thus more formal) pronoun has appeared to some extent, but mainly amongst shopkeepers towards the customers.

The same pronoun ''ni'' has also been used historically as a formal way of address, but its use has (in particular in Sweden, not so much in Swedish-speaking parts of Finland) been restricted to addressing people of lower social status, whereby a plethora of different constructions were employed as to avoid the issue of pronouns whatsoever. See also the article about [[w:T-V_distinction#Swedish|T-V distinction]] in Wikipedia.

====Declension====
{{sv-decl-ppron}}

----

==Venetian==

===Etymology===
Compare Italian {{term|due|lang=it}}

===Cardinal number===
{{head|vec|cardinal number}} {{m}}

# [[two]]

====Synonyms====
* [[dó]]

----

==Vietnamese==

===Verb===
'''du'''

# [[walk]]

====Derived terms====
* [[du lịch]]

{{attention|vi}}

[[Category:Vietnamese verbs]]

----

==Welsh==

===Adjective===
{{head|cy|adjective|formal plural|duon|comparative|duach|superlative|duaf}}

# [[black]]
#: Mae ganddo fo fwstash '''du''' - ''He has a black mustache''

====Mutation====

{{cy-mut-d|u}}

[[ang:du]]
[[ar:du]]
[[ast:du]]
[[az:du]]
[[br:du]]
[[cs:du]]
[[cy:du]]
[[da:du]]
[[de:du]]
[[et:du]]
[[el:du]]
[[es:du]]
[[eo:du]]
[[eu:du]]
[[fo:du]]
[[fr:du]]
[[fy:du]]
[[ga:du]]
[[gl:du]]
[[ko:du]]
[[hy:du]]
[[hr:du]]
[[io:du]]
[[is:du]]
[[it:du]]
[[ka:du]]
[[ku:du]]
[[lo:du]]
[[la:du]]
[[lv:du]]
[[lb:du]]
[[lt:du]]
[[li:du]]
[[hu:du]]
[[mg:du]]
[[fj:du]]
[[nl:du]]
[[ja:du]]
[[no:du]]
[[nn:du]]
[[nds:du]]
[[pl:du]]
[[pt:du]]
[[ro:du]]
[[ru:du]]
[[scn:du]]
[[fi:du]]
[[sv:du]]
[[tr:du]]
[[uk:du]]
[[vi:du]]
[[vo:du]]
[[wa:du]]
[[zh:du]]