==Translingual==
{{stroke order|strokes=6}}

===Etymology===
{{unreferenced}}
{{Han compound|宀|t1=roof|子|t2=child|ls=psc|c1=s|c2=p}}. Also {{liushu|ic}} – to give birth (child at home).<!-- really? -->

{{Han etyl}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rad=子|rn=39|as=03|sn=6|four=3040<sub>7</sub>|canj=十弓木 (JND)|ids=⿱[[宀]][[子]]}}

# [[letter]], [[character]], [[word]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0277.180|dkj=06942|dj=0545.070|hdz=21010.020|uh=5B57|ud=23383|bh=A672|bd=42610}}

----

==Cantonese==
{{zh-hanzi|字}}

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=zi6|y=ji6}}

# {{defn|lang=yue|sort=子03}}

----

==Japanese==

===Etymology 1===
Borrowed from Middle Chinese 字 with the southern pronunciation ([[kango]], [[Go-on]]).

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=じ|rom=ji|hidx=し'}}

# a [[letter]], [[character]]
#: この字は何と読みますか？
#:: このじはなんとよみますか？
#:: ''kono ji wa nanto yomimasuka?''
#:: How do you pronounce this letter?
# [[handwriting]]
#: 彼女は字が上手い。
#:: かのじょはじがうまい。
#:: ''kanojo wa ji ga umai.''
#:: She has good handwriting.

====Counter====
{{ja-pos|k|counter|hira=じ|rom=ji|hidx=し'}}

# [[letters]], [[characters]]
#: 40字以内で書いてください。
#:: よんじゅうじいないでかいてください。
#:: ''yonjū-ji inai de kaite kudasai.''
#:: Please write it down within 40 letters.

====Kanji====
{{ja-kanji|grade=1|rs=子03}}

=====Readings=====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[じ]] (''ji'')|kun=[[あざ]] (''aza''), [[うむ]] (''umu''), [[ます]] (''masu'')}}

=====Compounds=====
* [[十字]] (じゅうじ, ''jūji''): [[cross]]
* [[字解]] (じかい, ''jikai'')
* [[字義]] (じぎ, ''jigi''): the meaning of a word
* [[字源]] (じげん, ''jigen''): the construction of a character
* [[字体]] (じたい, ''jitai''): font or lettering
* [[字典]] (じてん, ''jiten''): character dictionary
* [[字母]] (じぼ, ''jibo''): letter (of the alphabet)
* [[漢字]] (かんじ, ''kanji''): Chinese characters
*: [[漢字返し]] ([[kanji-gaeshi]]) kanji repeater
* [[文字]] (もじ, ''moji''): letter, character, or ideograph
* [[字引]] (じびき, ''jibiki''): dictionary
* [[数字]] (すうじ, ''sūji''): numeral or number

===Etymology 2===
Shortened form of [[あざな]] ''azana'' "a section of a village" of ancient Japanese origin ([[wago]]).

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=あざ|rom=aza|hidx=あざ}}

# a [[section]] of a [[village]]

=====Derived terms=====
* [[大字]]
* [[小字]]

[[Category:1000 Japanese basic words|し']]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=[[자]]|eumhun=글자|rv=ja|mr=cha}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=子03}}

----

==Late Middle Chinese==
{{zh-hanzi|字}}

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|[ dzi ]|lang=ltc}}

===Noun===
{{infl|ltc|noun|sc=Hani}} (''Baxter'' dziH)

# Chinese writing
# Chinese character; Chinese characters
# {{archaic|lang=ltc}} [[w:Chinese style name|Chinese style name]]

===References===
* http://www-personal.umich.edu/~wbaxter/pdf/d181-188.pdf
* http://xiang.free.fr/leiden-en.pdf
* http://www.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/Linguistics/papers/2004/anderson.pdf (dead link)

----

==Mandarin==
{{zh-hanzi|字}}

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|zh-zì.ogg|audio}}
* {{IPA|[ tsɨ˥˩ ]|lang=cmn}}

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[zì]] ([[zi4]])|wg=tzu<sup>4</sup>}}

===Noun===
{{cmn-noun|ts|pin=zì|pint=zi4|rs=子03}}

# Chinese writing
# Chinese character; Chinese characters
# [[-shaped]]
# {{archaic|lang=cmn}} [[w:Chinese style name|Chinese style name]]

====Derived terms====
* [[丁字]]
* [[写字]]
* [[文字]]
* {{zh-ts|[[漢字]]|[[汉字]]}}

===See also===
* [[Special:Prefixindex/字]]

[[Category:Mandarin entries with audio links]]
[[Category:zh-cn:Beginning Mandarin|zi4]]
[[Category:zh-tw:Beginning Mandarin|子03字]]

----

==Middle Chinese==

===Han character===
'''字''' (*dzhiə̀)<!--note: asterisk indicates that this character appears more than four times in the Tang Dynasty corpus of literature-->

# {{defn|lang=zhx-mid|sort=子03}}

----

==Min Nan==
{{zh-hanzi|字}}

===Pronunciation===
* {{a|Quanzhou}} {{IPA|[ li˧˧ ]|lang=nan}}
* {{a|Zhangzhou}} {{IPA|[ ʑi˧˧ ]|lang=nan}}

===Noun===
{{nan-noun|ts|poj=[[jī]] or [[lī]]|pojt=ji7|rs=子03}}

# Chinese writing
# Chinese character; Chinese characters
# {{archaic|lang=nan}} [[w:Chinese style name|Chinese style name]]

====Derived terms====
* [[文字]]
* {{zh-ts|[[漢字]]|[[汉字]]}}

===See also===
* [[Special:Prefixindex/字]]

----

==Old Chinese==
{{zh-hanzi|字}}

===Noun===
{{infl|och|noun|sc=Hani}} (ʒǝh)
# Chinese writing
# Chinese character; Chinese characters
# {{archaic|lang=och}} [[w:Chinese style name|Chinese style name]]

===Verb===
{{infl|och|verb|sc=Hani}} (ʒǝh)
# {{archaic|lang=och}} to give birth (to lay an egg, in the case of a bird)
# {{archaic|lang=och}} to [[nurse]]
# {{archaic|lang=och}} to [[nurture]]
# {{archaic|lang=och}} to [[love]]
# {{archaic|lang=och}} to [[marry]]; to [[wed]]
# {{archaic|lang=och}} to [[educate]]

===References===
* http://www.chinese-tools.com/tools/chinese-dictionary/dico_字.html
* http://140.111.34.46/cgi-bin/dict/GetContent.cgi?Database=dict&DocNum=130109&GraphicWord=yes&QueryString=字

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[tự]], [[chữ]], [[tợ]]|rs=子03}}
# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=子03}}

====Readings====
*Nôm: [[chữ]], [[tự]], [[tợ]]

====References====
* Thiều Chửu : Hán Việt Tự Điển  Hà Nội 1942
* Trần Văn Chánh: Từ Điển Hán Việt NXB Trẻ, Ho Chi Minh Ville, 1999
* Vũ Văn Kính: Đại Tự Điển Chữ Nôm , NXB Văn Nghệ, Ho Chi Minh Ville, 1999

====Compounds====
* [[字儒]]
* [[字喃]] ([[chữ nôm]])

[[de:字]]
[[et:字]]
[[fr:字]]
[[ko:字]]
[[it:字]]
[[lo:字]]
[[lt:字]]
[[li:字]]
[[hu:字]]
[[mg:字]]
[[ms:字]]
[[ja:字]]
[[km:字]]
[[pl:字]]
[[pt:字]]
[[ru:字]]
[[tr:字]]
[[uk:字]]
[[vi:字]]
[[zh:字]]