==Translingual==
{{stroke order|strokes=8}}
===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=9|rad=人|as=06|sn=8|four=2424<sub>1</sub>|canj=人土木戈 (OGDI)|ids=⿰[[亻]][[寺]]}}

# [[serve]], [[attend]] upon
# [[attendant]], [[servant]]
# [[samurai]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0101.260|dkj=00589|dj=0215.070|hdz=10143.170|uh=4F8D|ud=20365|bh=A8CD|bd=43213}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=si6|y=si6}}

# {{defn|lang=yue|sort=人06}}

----

==Japanese==

===Etymology 1===
saburapi > saburaɸi > saburawi > saburai. The nominalized form of the verb {{term|侍う|saburap-}}.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|さぶらい|hhira=さぶらひ}}

# one who serves nearby; a servant
# a warrior; [[samurai]]
#* {{RQ:Nippo Jisho|545}}
#*: '''Saburai'''. サブライ(侍) 貴族, または,尊敬すべき人〔武士〕.

===Etymology 2===
{{ja-kanjitab|さむらい|yomi=k}}
saburaɸi > samuraɸi > samurawi > samurai. From earlier {{term|侍|saburaɸi}}.
* {{audio|Ja-samurai.ogg|Audio|lang=ja}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|さむらい|hhira=さむらひ}}

# one who serves nearby; a servant
# a warrior; [[samurai]]

====Kanji====
{{ja-kanji|grade=c|rs=人06}}

# {{defn|lang=ja|sort=人06}}

=====Readings=====
* {{ja-readings|goon=[[じ]] (ji)|kanon=[[し]] (shi)|kun=[[さむらい]] (samurai), [[はべる]] (haberu), [[さぶらう]] (saburau)}}

====Verb====
See [[侍する]] ([[じする]], jisuru) or [[侍る]] ([[はべる]], haberu)

# {{defn|lang=ja|sort=人06}}

=====Compounds=====
* [[侍気質]] (さむらいかたぎ, samuraikatagi)
* [[侍八騎]] (さむらいはっき, samuraihakki)
* [[侍医]] (じい, jii)
* [[侍衛]] (じえい, jiei)
* [[侍衛長]] (じえいちょう, jieichō)
* [[侍御]] (じぎょ, jigyo)
* [[侍講]] (じこう, jikō)
* [[侍祭]] (じさい, jisai)
* [[侍史]] (じし, jishi)
* [[侍者]] (じしゃ, jija)
* [[侍臣]] (じしん, jishan)
* [[侍従]] (じじゅう, jijū)
* [[侍従官]] (じじゅうかん, jijūkan)
* [[侍従職]] (じじゅうしょく, jijūshoku)
* [[侍従長]] (じじゅうちょう, jijūchō)
* [[侍従武官]] (じじゅうぶかん, jijūbukan)
* [[侍女]] (じじょ, jijo)
* [[侍僧]] (じそう, jisō)
* [[侍読]] (じどく, jidoku)
* [[侍婢]] (じひ, jihi)
* [[侍立]] (じりつ, jiritsu)
* [[田舎侍]] ([[いなかざむらい]], inakazamurai)
* [[犬侍]] (いぬざむらい, inuzamurai)
* [[芋侍]] (いもざむらい, imozamurai)
* [[近侍]] (きんじ, kinji)
* [[国侍]] (くにざむらい, kunizamurai)
* [[典侍]] (てんじ, tenji)
* [[内侍]] (ないじ, naiji)
* [[陪侍]] (ばいじ, baiji)
* [[若侍]] (わかざむらい, wakazamurai)

===References===
* {{R:Nippo Jisho}}

[[Category:Japanese terms written with one Han script character]]
[[Category:Japanese terms spelled with 侍]]
----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=시|rv=si|mr=si}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=人06}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[shì]] ([[shi4]])|wg=shih<sup>4</sup>}}

# {{defn|lang=cmn|sort=人06}}
# to serve

The very Chinese character rootedly<!--What does "rootedly" mean in this context?--> means to serve and to accompany at the same time.
Meanwhile, it makes up relative words as follows.

* 侍从: shicong, servants of the emperor or officials.
* 侍奉: shifeng, to serve.
* 侍候: shihou, to serve in a more respectul way with an implication of waiting ([[侯]]).
* 侍郎: shilang, a title of a sort of ancient official.
* 侍弄: shinong, to detail.

Reference: ''Contenporary Chinese Dictionary'' (Xiandai Hanyu Cidian), Beijing: Commercial Press, 1994

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[thị]]|rs=人06}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=人06}}

====References====
*[http://nomfoundation.org/common/nom_details.php?codepoint=4f8d Nom Foundation]

[[de:侍]]
[[fr:侍]]
[[ko:侍]]
[[lo:侍]]
[[la:侍]]
[[lt:侍]]
[[hu:侍]]
[[mg:侍]]
[[ja:侍]]
[[pl:侍]]
[[ru:侍]]
[[sv:侍]]
[[uk:侍]]
[[vi:侍]]
[[zh:侍]]