==Japanese==
{{kanji readings tab|言|い|sort=いう|yomi=kun}}

===Etymology===
ipu > iɸu > *iwu > iu. Medial /h/ regularly changed from [p] > [ɸ] > [w]. Japanese never distinguished between /wu/ and /u/, so it automatically becomes [u]. The /w/ only surfaces in negative form: iwanai, where the phoneme /wa/ exists. Surface forms /iwimasu/ and /iwemasu/ automatically become [iimasu] and [iemasu] since Japanese no longer distinguishes /wi, we/ from /i, e/. Possibly related to Korean [[입]] (ip) “mouth”.

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|Ja-iu-to say.ogg|Audio}}

===Alternative forms===
* [[謂う]]
* [[云う]]

===Verb===
{{ja-verb|kk|type=1|hira=いう|hhira=いふ|rom=iu}}

# to [[say]], to [[tell]] somebody
#* c. '''762''': ''Shōsōin Man'yōgana Monjo''
#*: 和可夜之奈比乃 可波利爾波 於保末之末須 美奈美乃末知奈流奴乎 宇氣與止 於保止己可都可佐乃比止'''伊布''' 之可流可由恵爾 序禮宇氣牟比止良 久流末毛太之米弖 末都利伊禮之米太末布日 與禮良毛伊太佐牟 之可毛己乃波古美於可牟毛 阿夜布可流 可由恵爾 波夜久末可利太末布日之 於保己可ツ可佐奈比氣奈波 比止乃太氣太可比止 □己止波宇氣都流
#* c. 890: [[w:Taketori Monogatari|Taketori Monogatari]] (page 7)
#*: 「おのが生さぬ子なれば、心にも従はずなんある」と'''言ひ'''て、月日過ぐす。
#* 10th century: [[w:Ise Monogatari|Ise Monogatari]] (chapter 6, page 84)
#*: 「あなや」と'''いひ'''けれど、神鳴るさはぎにえ聞かざりけり。<br>私が'''言う'''ようにしなさい。<br>わたしが'''いう'''ようにしなさい。
#*:: ''Watashi ga '''iu''' yō ni shinasai.''
#*::: Do as I '''tell''' you.
# to [[call]], to [[name]] to [[give]] a name
#* c. 890: [[w:Taketori Monogatari|Taketori Monogatari]] (page 3)
#*: いまは昔、竹取の翁と'''いふ'''もの有けり。<br>この[[動物]]は[[日本語]]で何と言いますか。<br>この[[どうぶつ]]は[[にほんご]]でなんといいますか。
#*:: ''Kono [[dōbutsu]] wa [[Nihongo]] de nan to '''iimasu''' ka?''
#*::: What do you '''call''' this [[animal]] in [[Japanese]]?

====Derived terms====
* [[言う迄もない]] (iu made mo nai)
* [[言うに及ばず]] (iu ni oyobazu)
* [[言うに足らず]] (iu ni tarazu)
* [[言わん方無し]] (iwan kata nashi)
* [[言わぬが花]] (iwanu ga hana)
* [[言わずもがな]] (iwazu mogana)

====Conjugation====
{{ja-go-u|言|い|i}}

===References===

* {{reference-book
  | last = Horiuchi
  | first = Hideaki
  | coauthors = Ken Akiyama
  | title = [[w:Taketori Monogatari|Taketori Monogatari]] , [[w:Ise Monogatari|Ise Monogatari]]
  | publisher = [[w:Iwanami Shoten Publishing|Iwanami Shoten]]
  | date = 1997
  | location = Tōkyō
  | id = ISBN 4-00-240017-4
  }}
* {{R:Nara Ibun 3}}

[[Category:1000 Japanese basic words|いう]]

[[af:言う]]
[[cs:言う]]
[[et:言う]]
[[fr:言う]]
[[ko:言う]]
[[lo:言う]]
[[lt:言う]]
[[li:言う]]
[[hu:言う]]
[[mg:言う]]
[[fj:言う]]
[[ja:言う]]
[[pl:言う]]
[[pt:言う]]
[[fi:言う]]
[[chr:言う]]
[[uk:言う]]
[[zh:言う]]