{{also|沉|瀋|渖}}
==Translingual==

===Etymology===
沈, meaning "to sink", is pronounced ''shen''. 沈 is also a simplification of [[瀋]], meaning "juice" or "liquid." 沈 as surname character cannot be written as 沉 or 瀋.

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=85|rad=水|as=04|sn=7|four=3411<sub>2</sub>|canj=水中月山 (ELBU)}}

# [[sink]], [[submerge]]
# addicted to
# used as a surname
# juice, liquid, water, leak, pour

* '''Name Meaning''': Men Who Don't Yield to Power

* '''Origins of Surname 沈'''
*# Descendants of Shao Hao. The grandson of Shao Hao was the king’s teacher, and he had two sons, Yun Ge and Tai Dai. Tai Dai was awarded the land of ShanXi, for his achievements in fighting the flood, during Zhuan Xu’s reign. The descendants of Tai Dai were divided into four tribes, Shen, Yi, Ru, and Huang, known as the four kingdoms. The Shen kingdom was in RuNan of HeNan. In 506 B.C., all the northern kingdoms formed an alliance in their effort to fight the Chu kingdom. The Shen kingdom did not participate and was eliminated by the Cai kingdom. From then on, its people began to bear the last name Shen.
*# The youngest brother of Zhou Wu Wang, Ran Ji, was awarded the kingdom of Shen, for his achievement of suppressing the rebellion following his brother’s death. His descendants also have the last name Shen.
*# Yet another origin came from the last name Mi. During Chun Qiu, The great grandson of Chu Jon Wang, Shu, was the governor of the town of Shen, and was known as Shen Yi Shu. Shen Yi Shu later became a high ranking official and was highly regarded because of his contribution in getting rid of corrupted officials like Fei Wu Ji and Yan Jiang Shi. His descendants also have the last name Shen.
*# Original definition was water workers but the meaning changed during the Mongol Dynasty.

* '''Hometown''': Wu Qing in ZheJiang province. Along the Yangtze river between Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Shanghai
* 

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0610.060|dkj=17189|dj=1002.150|hdz=31572.070|uh=6C88|ud=27784|bh=A848|bd=43080}}

----
1.Descendants of Shao Hao. The grandson of Shao Hao was the king’s sex teacher which taught the king how to anal his wife and many more.He also had two sons, Yun Ge and Tai Dai. Tai Dai was awarded the land of ShanXi, for his achievements in fighting the flood, during Zhuan Xu’s reign. The descendants of Tai Dai were divided into four tribes, Shen, Yi, Ru, and Huang, known as the four kingdoms. The Shen kingdom was in RuNan of HeNan. In 506 B.C., all the northern kingdoms formed an alliance in their effort to fight the Chu kingdom. The Shen kingdom did not participate and was eliminated by the Cai kingdom. From then on, its people began to bear the last name Shen.
2.The youngest brother of Zhou Wu Wang, Ran Ji, was awarded the kingdom of Shen, for his achievement of suppressing the rebellion following his brother’s death. His descendants also have the last name Shen.
3.Yet another origin came from the last name Mi. During Chun Qiu, The great grandson of Chu Jon Wang, Shu, was the governor of the town of Shen, and was known as Shen Yi Shu. Shen Yi Shu later became a high ranking official and was highly regarded because of his contribution in getting rid of corrupted officials like Fei Wu Ji and Yan Jiang Shi. His descendants also have the last name Shen.
4.Original definition was water workers but the meaning changed during the Mongol Dynasty.

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=|y=[[sam2]]|tra=瀋}}

# {{defn|Cantonese|sort=水04}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=c|rs=水04}}

# {{defn|Japanese|sort=水04}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[ちん]] (chin), [[じん]] (jin), [[しん]] (shin)|kun=[[しずむ]] (shizumu), [[しずめる]] (shizumeru)}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=[[침]], [[심]]|eumhun=|rv=chim, sim|mr=ch'im, sim|y=chim, sim}}

# {{defn|Korean|sort=水04}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|tra=瀋|pin=[[shěn]] ([[shen3]])|wg=shen<sup>3</sup>}}

# {{defn|Mandarin|sort=水04}}


[[zh-min-nan:沈]]
[[fr:沈]]
[[ko:沈]]
[[ja:沈]]
[[zh:沈]]