==Dutch==

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|dum|nl}} {{term|hebben|lang=dum}}, from {{etyl|odt|nl}} {{term|hebban|lang=odt}}, from {{etyl|gem-pro|nl}} {{recons|habjanan|lang=gem-pro}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|lang=nl|/ˈɦɛ.bə(n)/}}
* {{audio|Nl-hebben.ogg|audio}}

===Verb===
{{nl-verb|irr}}

# {{transitive}} To [[have]]; to [[possess]], [[own]], [[hold]].
#: '''''Hebt''' u een minuut?''
#:: Do you '''have''' a minute?
# {{context|lang=nl|transitive|medicine}} to be [[afflict]]ed with a disease
#: '''Ik '''heb''' longkanker.'''
#:: I '''have''' lung cancer.
# {{context|lang=nl|transitive|auxiliary}} {{n-g|Used to form the [[perfect tense]] of the [[active voice]] of most verbs, together with a [[past participle]].}}
#: ''Ik '''heb''' het koekje opgegeten.''
#:: I '''have''' eaten the biscuit.
#: ''Ze '''hadden''' hun auto net gewassen.''
#:: They '''had''' only just washed their car.
# {{context|lang=nl|transitive|auxiliary}} {{n-g|Used to form the [[perfect tense]] with the [[modal verbs]] ([[kunnen]], [[zullen]], [[hoeven]], [[moeten]], [[mogen]], [[willen]], [[durven]], [[zien]], [[horen]]).}}
#: ''Hij '''heeft''' naar huis moeten lopen.''
#:: He '''has''' had to walk home.
#: ''Ik '''heb''' hem horen praten.''
#:: I '''have''' heard him speak.
#: ''Dat '''had''' je zullen doen.''
#: You '''had''' been going to do that.

====Conjugation====
{{nl-conj-hebben}}

====Usage notes====
In spoken language of the Netherlands, '''heb''' is often used as second person singular present tense.
: English: ''You didn't do that, did you?''
: Standard Dutch: ''Je hebt dat niet gedaan, toch?''
: Netherlandic: ''Je heb dat [[nie#Dutch|nie]] gedaan, toch?''
: Compare Flemish: ''G'ebt da toch nie gedaan?'' - [[ge#Dutch|ge]]/[[gij]] always requires a '''t'''

====Synonyms====
* [[bezitten]]

====Derived terms====
* [[hebben en houden]]

----

==Low German==

===Alternative forms===
* {{qualifier|eastern Low Prussian|lang=nds}} [[hebbe]]
* {{qualifier|in various dialects|lang=nds}} {{l|nds|hewwen}}, {{l|nds|häwwen}}, {{l|nds|häbben}}, {{l|nds|hęwwen}}, {{l|nds|hębben}}

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|osx|nds}} {{term|hebbian|lang=osx}}, from {{etyl|gem-pro|nds}} {{recons|habjanan|lang=gem-pro}}.

===Verb===
{{head|nds|verb}}

# {{context|in several dialects, including|_|western|_|Low Prussian|lang=nds}} to [[have]]

----

==Middle Dutch==

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|odt|dum}} {{term|hebban|lang=odt}}, from {{etyl|gem-pro|dum}} {{recons|habjanan|lang=gem-pro}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|lang=dum|/ˈhebːən/}}

===Verb===
{{dum-verb}}

# to [[have]]

====Descendants====
* Dutch: {{l|nl|hebben}}

[[af:hebben]]
[[co:hebben]]
[[de:hebben]]
[[et:hebben]]
[[el:hebben]]
[[es:hebben]]
[[eu:hebben]]
[[fo:hebben]]
[[fr:hebben]]
[[io:hebben]]
[[id:hebben]]
[[ku:hebben]]
[[lb:hebben]]
[[lt:hebben]]
[[li:hebben]]
[[mg:hebben]]
[[fj:hebben]]
[[nl:hebben]]
[[no:hebben]]
[[oc:hebben]]
[[nds:hebben]]
[[pl:hebben]]
[[pt:hebben]]
[[ro:hebben]]
[[scn:hebben]]
[[fi:hebben]]
[[sv:hebben]]
[[uk:hebben]]
[[vi:hebben]]
[[zh:hebben]]