{{also|Appendix:Variations of "hun"}}
==English==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|en|/hʌn/}}

===Etymology 1===

====Noun====
{{en-noun}}

# {{lb|en|informal}} {{alternative spelling of|en|hon|gloss=affectionate abbreviation of ''[[honey]]''}}

===Etymology 2===

====Noun====
{{en-noun}}

# A [[grey partridge]].

===Anagrams===
* {{anagrams|en|a=hnu|nuh|unh}}

[[Category:en:Fowls]]

----

==Alemannic German==

===Alternative forms===
* {{alter|gsw|hund|hunn|hònn||Walser}}
* {{alter|gsw|Hund}}

===Etymology===
From {{inh|gsw|gmh|hunt}}, from {{inh|gsw|goh|hunt}}, from {{inh|gsw|gem-pro|*hundaz}}. Cognate with {{cog|de|Hund}}, {{cog|nl|hond}}, {{cog|en|hound}}, {{cog|is|hundur}}.

===Noun===
{{head|gsw|noun|g=m}}

# {{lb|gsw|Formazza}} [[dog]]

===References===
* {{R:Patuzzi}}

{{topics|gsw|Dogs}}

----

==Breton==

===Noun===
{{br-noun}}

# [[sleep]]

----

==Catalan==

===Pronunciation===
* {{ca-IPA}}
* {{homophones|ca|un}}

===Noun===
{{ca-noun|m|f=huna}}

# [[Hun]]

===Further reading===
* {{R:IEC2}}
* {{R:GDLC}}
* {{R:DNV}}

----

==Danish==

===Etymology===
From {{der|da|non|hon}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|da|[hun]}}

===Noun===
{{da-noun|stem=hunn|en|er}}

# [[female]], [[she]]

====Inflection====
{{da-noun-infl|stem=hunn|en|er}}

===Pronoun===
{{head|da|pronoun|objective case|hende|possessive|hendes}}

# {{lb|da|personal}} [[she]]

====See also====
{{Danish personal pronouns}}

===References===
* {{R:Den Danske Ordbog}}

----

==Dutch==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|nl|/ɦʏn/}}
* {{audio|nl|Nl-hun.ogg|audio}}

===Etymology 1===

====Pronoun====
{{head|nl|pronoun|personal}}

# ''The dative case of the third-person plural personal pronoun:'' [[them]], to them.
# {{lb|nl|proscribed}} ''The accusative case of the third-person plural personal pronoun:'' [[them]].

=====Usage notes=====
The difference between ''hen'' (as direct object) and ''hun'' (as indirect object) does not stem from actual language usage, but was created artificially by the prescriptive grammarian Christiaen van Heule in the 17th century in an attempt to differentiate between the accusative (direct object) and dative case (indirect object), a distinction that was then commonly made in the definite article and certain pronouns, but not the personal pronouns.

In practice, ''hen'' and ''hun'' have been used interchangeably in Modern Dutch since the language has lost its grammatical case system. Many native speakers are not aware or have trouble remembering when to use the one or the other, in part because of the rule's artificiality, in part because the distinction in form between the accusative and dative case has not been preserved anywhere else in the language. As a consequence, it is common to hear sentences where they are used in the exactly opposite way from van Heule's rule; for example:
* ''Hij heeft '''hun''' verraden.'' (“He has betrayed '''them'''.”)
* ''Ze zijn met '''hun''' uitgegaan.'' (“They have gone out with them.”)
* ''Ik heb het '''hen''' gegeven.'' (“I have given it to them.”)

When the pronoun is unstressed, the problem can be circumvented by using the reduced form ''ze'':
* ''Hij heeft '''ze''' verraden.''
* ''Ze zijn met '''ze''' uitgegaan.''
* ''Ik heb het '''ze''' gegeven.''

For more information, see [[w:nl:Hen of hun|the article in the Dutch Wikipedia]].

====Pronoun====
{{head|nl|pronoun|personal}} {{tlb|nl|dependent possessive}} (''independent possessive'' '''[[hunne]]''')

# ''The third-person plural possessive pronoun:'' [[their]].

=====Inflection=====
{{nl-decl-personal pronouns}}

====Related terms====
* {{l|nl|zij}}, {{l|nl|ze}}
* {{l|nl|hen}}

===Etymology 2===
Likely a replacement of or based on dialectal Dutch {{m|nl|hullie|}} or a variant thereof, which is a contraction of ''{{l|nl|hunlieden}}'' or ''{{l|nl|hunlui}}'', a compound of ''hun'' ("them") + ''lieden'' or ''lui'' (both meaning "men, people"), which then translates roughly into "them-people". Possibly reinfluenced by or confused with the possessive ''hun''. This etymology explains why usage of ''hun'' occurs only when referring to people, never to objects. Compare {{cog|af|hulle}}, which also stems from {{m|nl||hunlui}}, but is now used also for things. For more information, see [[w:nl:Hun als onderwerp|the article in the Dutch Wikipedia]].

====Pronoun====
{{head|nl|pronoun|personal}}

# {{lb|nl|proscribed|regiolectal|Netherlands}} ''The nominative case of the third-person plural personal pronoun:'' [[they]] (only referring to people).

====Usage notes====
* The use of ''hun'' as a subject is considered incorrect or substandard by most speakers, both in written and spoken language, and only occurs in the Netherlands.

----

==Hungarian==

===Pronunciation===
* {{hu-IPA}}

===Etymology 1===
Borrowed from {{bor|hu|la|Hunni}}.<ref>{{R:Zaicz 2006}}</ref><ref>{{R:TotfalusiNagyEty 2001}}</ref>

====Adjective====
{{hu-adj|-}}

# of or relating to the [[Hun]]s

=====Declension=====
{{hu-infl-nom|huno|o|-}}

====Noun====
{{hu-noun|ok}}

# [[Hun]] {{gloss|a member of a nomadic tribe}}

=====Declension=====
{{hu-infl-nom|huno|o|-}}{{hu-pos-otok|hun|j|jai}}

===Etymology 2===
From {{m|hu|hol}}.

====Adverb====
{{head|hu|adverb}}

# {{lb|hu|dialectal}} {{alternative form of|hu|hol|gloss=where}}.

=====Derived terms=====
* {{l|hu|sehun}} {{q|dialectal}}

===References===
<references/>

===Further reading===
* {{sense|noun and adjective}} {{R:BarcziOrszagh 1962|hun-1-31449}}
* {{sense|adverb}} {{R:BarcziOrszagh 1962|hun-2-31451}}

{{cln|hu|three-letter words}}

----

==Label==

===Etymology===
Compare {{cog|ksd|vudu}} and {{cog|gfk|hudu}}.

===Noun===
{{head|lbb|noun}}

# [[banana]]

===References===
* {{R:Mosel 1980}}

[[Category:lbb:Fruits]]

----

==Malay==

===Noun===
{{ms-noun}}

# A unit of [[weight]] equal to one hundredth of a [[tahil]].

----

==Mandarin==

===Romanization===
{{cmn-pinyin}}

# {{nonstandard spelling of|cmn|sc=Latn|hūn}}
# {{nonstandard spelling of|cmn|sc=Latn|hún}}
# {{nonstandard spelling of|cmn|sc=Latn|hǔn}}
# {{nonstandard spelling of|cmn|sc=Latn|hùn}}

====Usage notes====
* {{cmn-toneless-note}}

----

==Middle English==

===Noun===
{{head|enm|noun}}

# {{alt form|enm|hund|t=hundred}}

----

==Middle Welsh==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|wlm|/hʉn/}}

===Numeral===
{{head|wlm|mutated numeral}}

# {{h-prothesis of|wlm|un}}

----

==Min Nan==
{{zh-see|分|poj}}

----

==Mizo==

===Noun===
{{head|lus|noun}}

# [[time]]

----

==North Frisian==

===Etymology===
From {{der|frr|ofs|hond}}. Cognates include Mooring North Frisian {{m|frr|hönj}} and West Frisian {{m|fy|hân}}.

===Noun===
{{head|frr|noun|g=f|plural|hunen}}

# {{lb|frr|Föhr-Amrum dialect}} {{lb|frr|anatomy}} [[hand]]
#: {{ux|frr|a rocht(er)/lacht(er) '''hun'''|the right/left '''hand'''}}

----

==Norwegian Bokmål==

===Etymology===
From {{der|nb|non|hon}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|nb|/hʉn/}}
* {{homophones|nb|hund|hunn}}
* {{rhymes|nb|ʉn}}

===Pronoun===
{{head|nb|pronoun|accusative|henne|genitive|hennes}}

# {{l|en|she}}

====Derived terms====
* {{l|nb|hunkjønn}} / {{l|nb|hunnkjønn}}

===See also===
{{nb-pers-pron}}
* {{l-nn|ho}}
* {{l-nn|hoe}}

===References===
* {{R:The Bokmål Dictionary}}

----

==Old Portuguese==

===Article===
{{head|roa-opt|article}}

# {{alternative form of|roa-opt|ũu}}

----

==Tetum==

===Noun===
{{head|tet|noun}}

# [[bottom]], [[base]]
# [[beginning]]
# [[origin]]

----

==Vietnamese==

===Pronunciation===
{{vi-pron}}

===Etymology 1===
Typical Central and Southern Vietnamese retention of medial ''*u'', which often developed into ‹ô› (or ‹o›) in Northern dialects; later strengthened with the use of "slang" to avoid awkward situations. Compare {{m|vi|rún}} vs. {{m|vi|rốn}}, {{m|vi|thúi}} vs. {{m|vi|thối}}.

====Verb====
{{vi-verb|[[㖧]]}}

# {{eye dialect of|vi|hôn|from=central Vietnam|from2=southern Vietnam}}

=====Synonyms=====
* {{l|vi|thơm}}, {{l|vi|hôn}}, {{l|vi|chu}}, {{l|vi|chụt}}, {{l|vi|mi}}

===Etymology 2===
{{vi-etym-sino|熏||hv=n|huân}}.

====Verb====
{{vi-verb|[[焝]], [[熏]], [[燻]]}}

# to [[smoke]] (to preserve or prepare (food) for consumption by treating with smoke)

=====Derived terms=====
{{vi-der|hun khói|hun đúc}}

----

==Welsh==

===Pronunciation===
* {{a|cy-N}} {{IPA|cy|/hɨːn/}}
* {{a|cy-S}} {{IPA|cy|/hiːn/}}

===Numeral===
{{head|cy|mutated numeral}}

# {{h-prothesis of|cy|un}}