==Translingual==

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=44|rad=尸|as=01|sn=4|four=7780<sub>7</sub>|canj=尸人 (SO)}}

# A [[traditional]] [[measurement]] of [[length]] in [[East Asia]] [[based]] on the [[human]] [[forearm]], [[usually]] [[roughly]] [[equivalent]] to <sup>1</sup>/<sub>3</sub> of a [[meter]] and [[gloss]]ed in [[English]] as a '[[foot]]'

====Derived characters====
* [[沢]] [[訳]] [[迟]] [[呎]] [[択]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0299.320|dkj=07632|dj=0595.100|hdz=20964.020|uh=5C3A|ud=23610|bh=A4D8|bd=42200}}

===See also===
* [[丈]]
* [[寸]]
* [[分]]

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|[[chi]]<br>([[Chinese foot]])}}
{{wikipedia|chi (unit)}}
===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=chǐ,chě
|c=ce2,cek3
|h=pfs=chhak;hpy=cag5
|mn=chhioh/chhek/chhe
|mn_note=chhioh, chhe - vernacular, chhek - literary
|w=
|mc=y
|oc=y
|ma=Zh-chi.ogg
|cat=n
}}

===Noun===
{{zh-noun|ts}}

# The [[chi]] or [[Chinese foot]], a [[traditional]] [[Chinese]] [[unit]] of [[distance]] [[base]]d on the [[human]] [[forearm]] and [[equal]] to 10 [[cun]] ([[寸]]) or <sup>1</sup>/<sub>10</sub> [[zhang]] ([[丈]])
# The [[mainland China|mainland]] [[chi]] or [[Chinese foot]], [[standardize]]d in 1984 as <sup>1</sup>/<sub>3</sub> of a [[meter]]
# {{context|Taiwan|lang=zh}} The [[Taiwan]]ese [[chi]] or [[Chinese foot]], [[standardize]]d as <sup>10</sup>/<sub>33</sub> of a [[meter]] and [[identical]] to the [[Japanese]] [[shaku]]
# {{context|Hong Kong|lang=yue}} The [[chek]] or [[Hong Kong foot]], [[standardize]]d as 0.371475 [[meter]]s
# {{context|informal|lang=zh}} a [[US]] or [[Imperial]] [[foot]]

====See also====
* [[丈]], [[寸]], [[分]]

====References====
*(''Hakka'') [http://minhakka.ling.sinica.edu.tw/bkg/hakyin/search.php?DETAIL=1&LIMIT=id=596&dbname=su_tian_1&graph=2 Academia Sinica - Hakka-English Dictionary]
*(''Hakka'') Lau, Chun-fat. ''Hakka Pinyin Dictionary'' (Chinese). [[Hong Kong]]: [[w:Chinese University of Hong Kong|The Chinese University Press]], 1997 <small>(Chinese IME supplement)</small> ISBN 962-201-750-9.
*(''Min Nan'') [http://twblg.dict.edu.tw/holodict_new/index.html Taiwan Min Nan Common Words Dictionary (臺灣閩南語常用詞辭典)]

----

==Japanese==

===Etymology 1===
{{wikipedia|shaku (unit)}}
====Pronunciation====
* {{IPA|/ɕaku/|lang=ja}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|しゃく}}

# The [[shaku]], "[[metal]] [[shaku]]", or [[Japanese foot]]: a [[traditional]] [[Japanese]] [[unit]] of [[length]] [[equal]] to 10 [[sun]] ([[寸]]) or <sup>1</sup>/<sub>10</sub> [[jō]] ([[丈]]), [[standardize]]d as <sup>10</sup>/<sub>33</sub> of a [[meter]]
#* {{RQ:Wamyō Ruijushō|6|46}}
#*: '''尺''' [...] 廣本無上字、説文、尺十寸也、人手却十分動脈爲寸口、十寸爲尺、尺所以指尺規榘事也从尸从乙、乙所識也、今俗呼佐之或呼毛乃佐之 [...]
#* c. 1177-1188: [[w:Iroha Jiruishō|Iroha Jiruishō]] (volume 9, page 55)
#*: 尺 '''シャク'''　十寸為尺
#* {{RQ:Nippo Jisho|741}}
#*: '''Xacu'''. シャク (尺) 1 palmoよりも少し長い, ある尺度. 例, Ix'''xacu''', ni'''xacu'''. (一尺, 二尺) '''Xacu'''uo toru. l, xacudoru. (尺を取る. または, 尺取る) 上述のようなpalmoを単位として寸法を計る.
# The "[[whale]] [[shaku]]", a [[variant]] of the [[shaku]] [[used]] in [[measuring]] [[cloth]] [[equal]] to <sup>125</sup>/<sub>330</sub> of a [[meter]]
# [[length]]
# {{context|zoology|lang=ja}} The [[geometer moth]] (''[[w:Geometer moth#Caterpillars|Geometra papilionaria]]'')
#* {{RQ:Nippo Jisho|741}}
#*: '''Xacu'''. l, xacumuxi. シャク. または, しゃくむし (尺. または, 尺虫) 歩くときに身を縮めたりしながら進む一種の小虫. '''Xacu'''de taiuo tçuru. (尺で鯛を釣る) 諺. この小虫で鯛を釣って取る人のように, 小さなもので大きなものを手に入れる.
# {{context|zoology|lang=ja}} The [[inchworm]]

=====Idioms=====
* [[尺で鯛を釣る]] (shaku de tai o tsuru)

===Etymology 2===
Compound of bound {{term|竹|taka|bamboo}} and {{term|測り|hakari}}, voiced due to [[w:Rendaku|compounding]].

====Pronunciation====
* {{IPA|/takabakari/|lang=ja}}

====Alternative forms====
* [[竹量]]
* [[鷹秤]]

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|たかばかり}}

# a bamboo measure
#* {{RQ:Wamyō Ruijushō|6|46}}
#*: '''尺''' 魏武上雜物䟽云、象牙尺、齒亦反、辨色立成云、尺竹量也、'''太加波可利'''

===Etymology 3===

====Kanji====
{{ja-kanji|grade=6|rs=尸01}}

# {{defn|lang=ja|sort=尸01}}

=====Readings=====
* {{ja-readings|goon=[[しゃく]] (shaku)|kanon=[[せき]] (seki) {{non-joyo-reading}}|kun=[[ものさし]] (monosashi)}}

=====Compounds=====
* [[尺八]] (shakuhachi)

===References===
* {{R:Nippo Jisho}}
* {{R:Wamyō Ruijushō}}
* {{reference-book
  | last = Tadakane
  | first = Tachibana
  | coauthors = [[w:Masamune Atsuo|Atsuo Masamune]] (ed.)
  | title = [[w:Iroha Jiruishō|Iroha Jiruishō]]
  | publisher = Kazama Shobō
  | year = 1971
  | origyear = c. 1177-1188
  | language = Japanese
}}

[[Category:ja:Units of measure|しゃく]]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=척|rv=[[cheok]]|mr=ch'ŏk|y=chek}}

# ([[자]]) [[Korean foot]] (30.3cm)
# ([[자]]) [[measure]]
# ([[길이]]) [[length]]

====Compounds====
{{top2}}
* [[尺蠖]] ([[척확]], ''cheoghwag'') [[measuring worm]], [[inchworm]], [[spanworm]], [[looper]]
{{mid2}}
* [[曲尺]] ([[곡척]], ''gogcheog'') [[steel square]], [[carpenter's square]]
{{bottom}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[xích]], [[xách]], [[xế]], [[xệch]], [[xịch]], [[sệch]], [[xạch]]|rs=尸01}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=尸01}}

====References====
*[http://nomfoundation.org/common/nom_details.php?codepoint=5c3a&img=1 Nom Foundation]

[[zh-min-nan:尺]]
[[de:尺]]
[[fr:尺]]
[[ko:尺]]
[[lo:尺]]
[[li:尺]]
[[hu:尺]]
[[mg:尺]]
[[ms:尺]]
[[ja:尺]]
[[no:尺]]
[[pl:尺]]
[[pt:尺]]
[[uk:尺]]
[[zh:尺]]