==Japanese==

===Etymology 1===
From {{etyl|ojp|ja}} root verb {{term|lang=ja|す|tr=su||to do}}.<ref name="KDJ">{{R:Kokugo Dai Jiten}}</ref><ref name="DJR">{{R:Daijirin}}</ref>

As with all verbs, during the Middle Japanese stage in the [[w:Kamakura period|Kamakura]] and [[w:Muromachi period|Muromachi]] periods, the {{term|lang=ja|終止形|tr=shūshikei||terminal or sentence-ending form}} was gradually lost as the {{term|lang=ja|連体形|tr=rentaikei||attributive form}} came to be used for both the attributive and terminal grammatical roles, realigning the conjugations.

====Pronunciation====
* {{ja-accent-common|h|す|る}}<ref name="NHK">{{R:NHK Hatsuon}}</ref>
* {{IPA|lang=ja|[sɯᵝɾ̠ɯᵝ]}}

====Alternative forms====
* {{ja-l|為る}} {{qualifier|rare}}

====Verb====
{{ja-verb|type=3}}

# to [[do]]
#: 何を'''して'''いますか。
#::なにを'''して'''いますか。
#::''Nani o '''shite''' imasu ka?''
#:::What are you '''doing'''?
# to wear (accessories)
#: ネクタイを'''する'''。
#:: ねくたいを'''する'''。
#:: ''Nekutai o '''suru'''.''
#::: To '''wear''' a necktie.

=====Usage notes=====
The verb {{lang|ja|する}} (“to do”) is seldom written in kanji ({{ja-l|為る}}).

It is common to use {{lang|ja|する}} after certain nouns to indicate that the noun is being done; this is ''highly'' [[productive]], meaning many nouns can be used as verbs in this way.  Some examples are:
* {{term|lang=ja|失礼|tr=shitsurei||rudeness}} → {{lang|ja|失礼'''する'''}} (''shitsurei '''suru''''', “to do a rudeness” → “to be rude”)
* {{term|lang=ja|旅行|tr=ryokō||journey}} → {{lang|ja|旅行'''する'''}} (''ryokō '''suru''''', “to do a journey” → “to travel”)

=====Synonyms=====
* {{sense|to do}} {{ja-l|成す}}, {{ja-l|為す|なす|nasu}} {{qualifier|somewhat archaic, usage is more limited}}
* {{sense|to do}} {{ja-l|行う|おこなう|okonau}} {{gloss|to carry out}}
* {{sense|used to make a verb}} {{term|る|〜る|tr=-ru|lang=ja}}, a much less productive suffix for turning a noun into a verb

=====See also=====
* {{ja-l|す||su}}

=====Conjugation=====
{{ja-suru|||}}

===Etymology 2===
Reading for various kanji spellings.

====Verb====
{{ja-verb}}

Various verbs deriving from senses similar to “to [[slide]]” or “to [[rub]]”:
# {{ja-def|刷る|摺る}} to [[print]] something {{qualifier|from the way the paper would be placed on the printing block and '''rubbed'''}}
# {{ja-def|掏る}} to [[pick]] someone's pocket {{qualifier|possibly from the way a pickpocket must '''slide''' along unnoticed;<ref name="KDJ"/> compare English {{term|lang=en|slick}}}}
# {{ja-def|擦る|摩る|磨る|擂る}} to [[slide]], to [[rub]], to [[chafe]], to [[strike]] (as in a match, by rubbing); to [[lose]] or [[waste]] money
# {{ja-def|剃る}} irregular reading for {{term|lang=ja|剃る|tr=soru||to shave}}

===References===
<references/>

[[Category:1000 Japanese basic words]]
[[Category:Japanese suppletive verbs]]

[[af:する]]
[[de:する]]
[[fr:する]]
[[ko:する]]
[[it:する]]
[[lo:する]]
[[la:する]]
[[lb:する]]
[[lt:する]]
[[li:する]]
[[mg:する]]
[[fj:する]]
[[ja:する]]
[[pl:する]]
[[pt:する]]
[[sv:する]]
[[chr:する]]
[[zh:する]]