==Translingual==
{{cleanup}}
===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=113|rad=示|as=05|sn=10|four=3520<sub>6</sub>|canj=戈火中田中 (IFLWL)}}

====Noun====
{{infl|mul|noun}}

# [[spirit]], [[god]], supernatural being

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0842.030|dkj=24673|dj=1261.020|hdz=42392.010|uh=795E|ud=31070|bh=AFAB|bd=44971}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=|y=san4}}

# [[god]], supernatural (spiritual) deity

----
==Japanese==

===Etymology===
/kami<sub>2</sub>/ *[kamɨ] > /kami/ [kami]. Not related to {{term|上|kami<sub>1</sub>|up}} or {{term|髪|kami<sub>1</sub>|hair}}. Often appears in compounds as /kamu/ indicating that /kami/ is a bound form deriving from */kamu.[[い|i]]/. See Ainu ''kamui''.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|[kami]|lang=ja}}

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|k|hira=かみ|rom=kami}}

# (an) all-powerful [[entity|entit(y/ies)]], worshiped by people: 
## (a) [[god]](s), [[deity|deit(y/ies)]]
## (a) [[spirit]](s)
# the [[divine]], [[divinity]]


#* {{RQ:Nippo Jisho|85}}
#*: '''Cami'''. カミ (神) 日本のゼンチヨ (gentios 異教徒)が尊崇する神(Cami).
#* [[thunder]]

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=3|rs=示05}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on={{l|ja|しん}} (shin), {{l|ja|じん}} (jin)|kun={{l|ja|かみ}} (kami), {{l|ja|こう}} (kou), {{l|ja|たましい}} (tamashii)}}

====Compounds====
{{top2}}
* {{l|ja|天神}} ({{l|ja|てんじん}}, ''[[tenjin]]''): lit. the "''[[heavenly]] [[god]]s/[[spirit]]s/[[being]]s''"
* {{l|ja|風神}} ({{l|ja|ふうじん}}, ''[[fūjin]]''): lit. "''[[wind]] [[god]]''"
* {{l|ja|雷神}} ({{l|ja|らいじん}}, ''[[raijin]]''): lit. "''[[thunder]] [[god]]''"
* {{l|ja|土神}} ({{l|ja|どじん}}, ''[[dojin]]''): lit. "''[[earth]] [[god]]''"
* {{l|ja|水神}} ({{l|ja|すいじん}}, ''[[suijin]]''): lit. "''[[water]] [[god]]''"
* {{l|ja|火神}} ({{l|ja|かじん}}, ''[[kajin]]''): lit. "''[[fire]] [[god]]''"
* {{l|ja|神仙}}: lit. a "''[[supernatural]]/[[celestial]] [[being]]''"
* {{l|ja|神罰}} ({{l|ja|しんばつ}}, ''[[shinbatsu]]''): lit. divine [[punishment]]; the [[judgement]] of god
* {{l|ja|神意}} (''[[shin'i]]''): lit. [[divine]] [[will]]; the will of [[god]]
* {{l|ja|神威}} (''[[shin'i]]''): lit. divine [[dignity]]; the dignity of god
* {{l|ja|神像}}: [[statue]], [[idol]], [[image]]
* {{l|ja|神韻}} (''[[shin'in]]'')
* {{l|ja|神格}} (''[[shinkaku]]'')
* {{l|ja|神学}} (''[[shingaku]]''): lit. [[theology]]
* {{l|ja|神楽}} (''[[w:Kagura|kagura]]''): lit. "''[[god]]-[[entertainment]]''" -- [[theatrical]] [[temple]] [[dance]]s
* {{l|ja|神官}} (''[[shinkan]]''): lit. a [[Shinto]] [[priest]]
* {{l|ja|神器}} (''[[jinki]]'', ''[[jingi]]''): lit. [[sacred]] [[treasure]]s
* {{l|ja|神曲}} (''[[shinkyoku]]''): lit. [[divina]] [[commedia]]
* {{l|ja|神経}} (''[[shinkei]]''): lit. a [[nerve]] ([[anatomy]])
* {{l|ja|神権}} (''[[shinken]]''): lit. divine [[right]]; the [[authority]] of (a) [[god]]
* {{l|ja|神事}} (''[[shinji]]'')
* {{l|ja|神髄}} (''[[shinzui]]'')
* {{l|ja|神魂}}: lit. a "''[[mindstate|state of mind]]; [[mind]]''"
* {{l|ja|神気}} (''[[shinki]]''): [[divine]] [[energy]]/[[aura]]
{{mid2}}
* {{l|ja|神話}} ({{l|ja|しんわ}}, ''[[shinwa]]''): [[myth]](ology), [[legend]], [[folklore]], [[fairy tale]]
* {{l|ja|神话}}: lit. [[myth]]; [[fairytale]]
* {{l|ja|神聖}} (''[[shinsei]]''): lit. [[holiness]]
* {{l|ja|神体}} (''[[shintai]]'')
* {{l|ja|神託}} (''[[shintaku]]''): lit. [[oracle]]
* {{l|ja|神通力}} (''[[jintsûriki]]''): lit. a "''[[supernatural]] [[force]]/[[power]]/[[energy]]''"
* {{l|ja|神殿}} (''[[shinden]]''): [[shrine]], [[temple]]
* {{l|ja|神道}} (''[[shintô]]''): lit. [[Shinto]]; "''the [[way]] of the [[gods]]''"
* {{l|ja|神秘}} (''[[shinpi]]''): lit. a/the [[divine]] [[mystery]]
* {{l|ja|神父}} (''[[shinpu]]''): lit. a "''[[father]]; a [[priest]] ([[Catholic]] or [[Orthodox]])''"
* {{l|ja|神霊}} (''[[shinrei]]''): lit. a "''[[divine]] [[spirit]]''"
* {{l|ja|神様}} (''[[kamisama]]''): lit. (the) "''[[honorable]] [[god]](s)''"
* {{l|ja|神天}} (''[[kamiten]]''): "''Divine [[heaven|Heaven(s)]]''"
* {{l|ja|神風}} (''[[kamikaze]]''): "''Divine Wind(s)''"
* {{l|ja|神雷}} (''[[kamirai]]''): "''Divine Thunder''"
* {{l|ja|神土}} (''[[kamitsuchi]]''): "''Divine Earth''"
* {{l|ja|神水}} (''[[kamimizu]]''): "''Divine [[water|Water(s)]]''"
* {{l|ja|神火}} (''[[kamiho]]''): "''Divine [[flame|Flame(s)]]''"
* {{l|ja|神主}} (''[[kan'nushi]]''): lit. a [[Shinto]] [[priest]]
* {{l|ja|神業}} (''[[kamiwaza]]'')
* {{l|ja|女神}} (''[[megami]]''): lit. (a) [[goddess]](s)
* {{l|ja|祖神}}: lit. (a) [[guardian]] [[spirit]], the spirit of ones/an [[ancestor]]
* {{l|ja|半神}} ({{l|ja|はんしん}}, ''[[hanshin]]''): lit. a "''[[demigod]]'';" one who is of a [[mixed]] [[divine]] and [[human]]/[[mortal]] [[heritage]]
* {{l|ja|神降}}: lit. "''[[god]]/[[divine]] [[spiritualist]]'';" an [[avatar]]
{{bottom}}

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|k|hira=かみ|rom=kami|hidx=かみ}}

# [[god]] (compare {{l|ja|神様}} [[God]])
# [[spirit]] (compare {{l|ja|精霊}} [[Spirit]])

[[Category:ja:God|かみ]]

====Synonyms====
* {{l|ja|祇}} ({{l|ja|くにつかみ}}, ''kunitsukami''): lit. an "''[[indigenous]] or [[local]] [[god]]; a [[earth]]-[[spirit]]'"
* {{l|ja|䰠}} ({{l|ja|しん}}, ''shin''): lit. a "''[[god]], [[spirit]], [[immortal]] ([[being]]), [[mountain]] [[deity]]''"

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=[[신]]|eumhun=|rv=sin|mr=sin|y=sin}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=示05}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[shēn]] ([[shen1]]), [[shén]] ([[shen2]])|wg=shen<sup>1</sup>, shen<sup>2</sup>}}

# {{defn|lang=cmn|sort=示05}}

====Compounds====
{{top4}}
* [[神經]]
* [[神奥]]
* [[神不守舍]]
* [[神不知，鬼不觉]]
* [[神采]]
* [[神差鬼使]]
* [[神驰]]
* [[神出鬼没]]
* [[神道]]
* [[神甫]]
* [[神工鬼斧]]
* [[神怪]]
* [[神汉]]
* [[神乎]]
* [[神乎其神]]
* [[神化]]
* [[神话]]
* [[神魂]]
* [[神机妙算]]
* [[神交]]
* [[神经]]
* [[神经病]]
{{mid4}}
* [[神经错乱]]
* [[神经过敏]]
* [[神经衰弱]]
* [[神经痛]]
* [[神经系统]]
* [[神经细胞]]
* [[神经纤维]]
* [[神经质]]
* [[神经中枢]]
* [[神龛]]
* [[神来之笔]]
* [[神力]]
* [[神聊]]
* [[神灵]]
* [[神领]]
* [[神秘]]
* [[神妙]]
* [[神明]]
* [[神女]]
* [[神品]]
* [[神婆]]
* [[神奇]]
{{mid4}}
* [[神气]]
* [[神枪手]]
* [[神情]]
* [[神曲]]
* [[神权]]
* [[神人]]
* [[神色]]
* [[神色不惊]]
* [[神伤]]
* [[神神叨叨]]
* [[神圣]]
* [[神使鬼差]]
* [[神思]]
* [[神似]]
* [[神速]]
* [[神算]]
* [[神髓]]
* [[神态]]
* [[神通]]
* [[神童]]
* [[神往]]
* [[神威]]
{{mid4}}
* [[神位]]
* [[神巫]]
* [[神武]]
* [[神悟]]
* [[神仙]]
* [[神像]]
* [[神效]]
* [[神学]]
* [[神医]]
* [[神异]]
* [[神勇]]
* [[神游]]
* [[神宇]]
* [[神韵]]
* [[神职人员]]
* [[神志]]
* [[神智]]
* [[神州]]
* [[神主]]
{{bottom}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[thần]]|rs=示05}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=示05}}

[[fr:神]]
[[ko:神]]
[[ku:神]]
[[la:神]]
[[lt:神]]
[[li:神]]
[[hu:神]]
[[mg:神]]
[[ms:神]]
[[ja:神]]
[[pl:神]]
[[ru:神]]
[[th:神]]
[[tr:神]]
[[zh:神]]