==Translingual==
===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=53|rad=广|as=11|sn=14|four=0022<sub>2</sub>|canj=戈尸一竹 (ISMH)}}
# used as a surname
# name of an ancient state
====References====
{{Han ref|kx=0350.050|dkj=09464|dj=0661.070|hdz=20900.070|uh=5ED6|ud=24278|bh=B9F9|bd=47609}}
----
The word 'Liao' is designated a surname. 
The surname Liao is about 3000 years old. The surname Liao is about 3,000 years old. 

The surname Liao originated in an area referred to during the Han Dynasty (漢朝206 BC to 220 AD) as the Ru Yang Prefecture (汝陽郡). The present day location of Ru Yang Prefecture is in an area about 60 kilometers southeast of Ru Nan county 汝南縣in Henan province (河南省). The surname Liao originated in an area referred to during the Han Dynasty (206 BC to the Han Dynasty 220 AD) as the Ru Yang Prefecture (Ruyang County). The present day location of Ru Yang Prefecture is in an area about 60 kilometers southeast of Ru Nan county Runan County in Henan province (Henan Province). 

Zhou King Wu (周武王) destroyed the Shang Dynasty (商朝1783 BC to 1122 BC) and established the Zhou Dynasty (周朝1134 BC to 250 B..C). Zhou King Wu claiming that he was the "Tian Zi" (天子Son of Heaven) and he had the "Tian Ming" (天命Mandate of Heaven) to destroy the preceding wicked Shang Dynasty. Zhou King Wu also claimed he was the mediator between man and nature. As a result of this proclaimation all the future Kings and Emperors (the title Emperor was first in used in 221 BC by Qin Shi Huang Di 秦始皇帝) called themselves the "Son of Heaven" and that they possessed the "Mandate of Heaven"  to do so. Zhou King Wu also proclaimed that the rules of inheritance should be from father to son and not from brother to brother as the preceding Shang Dynasty. Zhou King Wu (Zhouwuwang) destroyed the Shang Dynasty (1783 BC to 1122 Shang Dynasty BC) and established the Zhou Dynasty (1134 BC to the Zhou dynasty B. 250. C). Zhou King Wu claiming that he was the "Tian Zi" (emperor Son of Heaven) and he had the "Tian Ming" (Destiny Mandate of Heaven) to destroy the preceding wicked Shang Dynasty. Zhou King Wu also claimed he was the mediator between man and nature. As a result of this proclaimation all the future Kings and Emperors (the title Emperor was first in used in 221 BC by Qin Shi Huang Di emperor Dili) called themselves the "Son of Heaven," and that they possessed the "Mandate of Heaven" to do so. Zhou King Wu also proclaimed that the rules of inheritance should be from father to son and not from brother to brother as the preceding Shang Dynasty. 

Zhou King Wu now controlled a vast country. The primitive communications at that time made it impossible to govern such a big country efficiently from a centralised authority. Instead Zhou King Wu gave the authority to relatives, officials, generals and aristocrats to rule on his behalf. Zhou King Wu created five titles to honour his relatives and followers: Zhou King Wu now controlled a vast country. The primitive communications at that time made it impossible to govern such a big country efficiently from a centralised authority. Instead Zhou King Wu gave the authority to relatives, officials, generals and aristocrats to rule on his behalf . Zhou King Wu created five titles to honour his relatives and followers: 

(1) Gong (公) or the  Duke; (1) Gong (the public) or the Duke; 
(2) Hou (侯) or the Marquis; (2) Hou (HOU) or the Marquis; 
(3) Bo (伯) or the Count or Earl; (3) Bo (Bo) or the Count or Earl; 
(4) Zi  (子) or the Viscount; (4) Zi (a), or the Viscount; 
(5) Nan (南) the Baron; (5) Nan (South) the Baron; 

Zhou King Wu had many brothers and they had all assisted him in overthrowing the preceding Dynasty. One of them was Ji Liao (姬廖) whom Zhou King Wu employed as a high-ranking official. Zhou King Wu bestowed upon Ji Liao the title of Bo. Ji Liao came to be known as Liao Bo (廖伯). After Zhou King Wu died in 1116BC his son Zhou King Cheng (周成王) succeeded him. Liao Bo continued to serve in the Zhou Court and helped the new King to govern the fledging Zhou King Wu had many brothers and they had all assisted him in overthrowing the preceding Dynasty. One of them was Ji Liao (JI Liao) whom Zhou King Wu employed as a high-ranking official. Zhou King Wu bestowed upon Ji Liao the title of Bo. Ji Liao came to be known as Liao Bo (Liaoboqin). After Zhou King Wu died in 1116BC his son Zhou King Cheng (Zhou Wang) succeeded him. Liao Bo continued to serve in the Zhou Court and helped the new King to govern the fledging 
Zhou empire. Liao Bo's offspring adopted LIAO as their surname in remembrance of him. Zhou empire. Liao Bo's offspring adopted LIAO as their surname in remembrance of him. 

by CHUNG Yoon-Ngan  (   鄭   永   元   ) E-mail: chungyn@mozart.joinet.net.au By CHUNG Yoon-Ngan (ZHENG Yong-yuan)

==Cantonese==
===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=|y=liu6}}
# {{defn|Cantonese}}
----
==Japanese==
===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=|rs=广11}}
# {{defn|Japanese}} 
====Readings====
{{ja-readings|on=[[りょう]] (ryō)|kun=[[むなしい]] (munashii)}}
----
==Korean==
===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=료|rv=ryo|mr=ryo}}
# {{defn|Korean}}
----
==Mandarin==
===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[liào]] ([[liao4]]), [[wú]] ([[wu2]])|wg=liao<sup>4</sup>, wu<sup>2</sup>}}
# {{defn|Mandarin}}

[[zh-min-nan:廖]]
[[fr:廖]]
[[ja:廖]]