{{character info}}
==Translingual==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|mul|/ɻ̩/|/r/}}
<!--Hmm, I can't find the sources, but it's also pronounced just as ri though I'm not sure that's the right IPA-->

===Letter===
{{mul-Deva|ṛ}}

# Traditionally classified as a vowel of the [[Devanagari]] script. Its [[matra]], used to modify the inherent vowel in a consonant, is written &#x0943;. For example the first consonant क with the matra looks like: कृ. It is only used in words of Sanskrit derivation. Transliterated as [[w:IAST|IAST]]: [[ṛ]] or [[w:ITRANS|ITRANS]]: [[RRi]] or R^i.

----

==Hindi==

===Pronunciation===
* {{hi-IPA|रि}}

===Letter===
{{head|hi|letter}}

# The seventh [[vowel]] in [[Hindi]].

====See also====
* {{sense|matra}} {{l|hi|ृ}}
* {{list:Devanagari script letters/hi}}

----

==Marathi==

===Pronunciation===
{{IPA|mr|/ɾu/}}

===Letter===
{{head|mr|letter}}

# The seventh [[vowel]] in [[Marathi]], pronounced "roo".

----

==Sanskrit==

===Root===
{{sa-root}}

I. 1 P. [ऋच्छति, आर, आर्षीत्, अरिष्यति, ऋत; caus. अर्पयति; desid. अरिरिषति; अरार्यते reduplicative (अत्यर्थमृच्छति) cf. किमभीरुररार्यसे Bk.4.21.]
# To go, move; अम्भच्छा- यामच्छामृच्छति Śi.4.44. यथाश्मानमृत्वा लोष्ठो विध्वंसेत Bṛi. Up.1.3.7.
# To rise, tend towards.
II. 3 P. (इयर्ति, आरत्, ऋत Mostly used in the Veda.)
# To go.
# To move, shake.
# To obtain, gain, acquire, reach, meet with.
# To move, excite, raise (as voice, words &c.) वाचमियर्ति.
# To display.
III. 5 P. (ऋणोति, ऋण)
# To injure, hurt.
# To attack. -Caus. (अर्पयति, आर्पिपत्, अर्पित)
# To throw, cast, fling; fix or implant in; हृदि शल्यमर्पितम् R.8.87.
# To put or place on, fix upon, direct or cast towards (as the eye &c.); वामत्रकोष्ठार्पितहेमवेत्रः Ku.3.41; Ś.6.5,17,3.26; R.17. 79; Ś.6.8; Bk.5.9; Ku.6.11; R.15.77; Bg.8.7, 12.14; करपल्लवार्पित Śi.9.54.
# To place in, insert, give, set or place; अपथे पदमर्पयन्ति हि R.9.74,78; चित्रार्पिताम् Ś.6.15 drawn in a picture; R.2.31; द्वारदेशे Amaru. 62; V.4.35; Mu.7.6; Bh.3.18; लोकोत्तरं चरितमर्पयति प्रतिष्ठाम् R. G.
# To hand or make over; give to, give in charge of, consign, deliver; इति सूतस्याभरणान्यर्पयति Ś.1,4. 19; Bk.8.118; Y.2.65.
# To give up, sacrifice (as the inherent sense); अत्र कलिङ्गगङ्गाशब्दौ आत्मानमर्पयतः S. D.2.
# To give back, restore; अर्पितप्रकृतिकान्तिभिर्मुखैः R.19.1; Bk.15.16; Amaru.94; Ms.8.191; Y.2. 169.
# To pierce through, perforate, penetrate.