{{also|牀}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|strokes=7}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=53|rad=广|as=04|sn=7|four=0029<sub>4</sub>|canj=戈木 (ID), X戈木 (XID)|ids=⿸[[广]][[木]]}}

# [[bed]], [[couch]]
# [[framework]], [[chassis]]

====See also====
* [[麻]] [[凩]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0343.240|dkj=09242|dj=0653.120|hdz=20873.200|uh=5E8A|ud=24202|bh=A7C9|bd=42953}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=|y=chong4}}

# {{defn|lang=yue|sort=广04}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=c|rs=广04}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|
on=[[しょう]] (''shō'')|
kun=[[ゆか]] (''yuka''), [[とこ]] (''toko''), [[ゆかしい]] ([[床しい]], ''yukashii'')
}}

===Etymology 1===
Attested in the {{l|ja|日本書紀|tr=''Nihon Shoki''}}, completed in 720 and one of the earliest works written in Japanese (see [[Wikipedia:Nihon Shoki]]), with a meaning of {{{term|lang=en|bed}}.

According to the {{Jpan|和句解}} (''Wakuge''), published in 1668 by early Edo-period scholar Matsunaga Teitoku ({{Jpan|松永貞徳}}; see [[Wikipedia:ja:松永貞徳]]), derives from ゆか (''yuka'') as the {{term|lang=ja|未然形|tr=''[[mizenkei]]''||[[irrealis]] form}} stem of the verb {{term|lang=ja|行く|tr=yuku||to go}} of an original meaning similar to "not going", in reference to a place where one sits down to rest.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=ゆか|rom=yuka}}

# The [[floor]] (the bottom surface of a room).
# A [[bed]].
# {{context|theater|lang=ja|sort=ゆか}} A raised area of a [[stage]] where a [[presenter]] or [[musician]] sits.
# A raised [[platform]] erected along the Kamo River in Kyōto in summer, used as an outdoor [[tea]] shop or [[restaurant]].

=====Antonyms=====
* {{sense|floor}} {{l|ja|天井|tr=[[てんじょう]], ''[[tenjō]]''}}: [[ceiling]]

=====Coordinate terms=====
* {{sense|floor}} {{l|ja|壁|tr=[[かべ]], ''[[kabe]]''}}: [[wall]]

===Etymology 2===
Shared origin with {{l|ja|所}} ({{l|ja|ところ}}, ''tokoro''), "place".  Attested since at least the Nara period, appearing in the {{l|ja|万葉集|tr=''Man'yōshū''}}, completed in 759 (see [[Wikipedia:Man'yōshū]]).

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=とこ|rom=toko}}

# A [[raised]] [[platform]] roughly 30cm tall used in dirt-floored rooms as a [[seat]].
# A raised area on which to sleep: a [[bed]].
# The [[floor]].
# [[tatami|Tatami]] mats.
# The seat of an [[oxcart]].
# Short for {{l|ja|床間}} / {{l|ja|床の間|tr=''toko no ma''}}: An [[alcove]] with a raised floor along one wall of a traditional Japanese living room.
# An alcove with a raised floor used as a [[study]]: see {{l|ja|付書院|tr=''tsukeshoin''}}.
# A [[box seat]], such as at a [[parade]], [[theater]], or [[stadium]].
# Short for {{l|ja|床店|tr=''tokomise''}}: A [[stall]] with a raised floor used as a store.
# Short for {{l|ja|床屋|tr=''tokoya''}}: A [[barbershop]], from how such shops were historically often ''tokomise''.
# Short for {{l|ja|床船梁|tr=''tokofunabari''}}, {{l|ja|舵床|tr=''kajidoko''}}: The large [[wooden]] [[beam]] at the very [[aft]] of a traditional [[wood]]-[[hulled]] Japanese [[ship]], upon which the [[rudder]] is seated.
# The [[heel]] of a [[plough]]; the part of the bottom of a plough that touches the ground and guides the [[ploughshare]].
# Short for {{l|ja|苗床|tr=''naedoko''}}: A [[seedbed]].
# Short for {{l|ja|鉄床}}, {{l|ja|金床|tr=''kanatoko''}}: An [[anvil]].

===Etymology 3===

====Counter====
{{ja-pos|k|counter|hira=しょう|rom=-shō}}

# [[bed]]s

=====Alternative forms=====
* {{l|ja|牀}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=상|rv=sang|mr=sang}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=广04}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|zh-chuáng.ogg|audio}}

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[chuáng]] ([[chuang2]])|wg=ch'uang<sup>2</sup>}}

# {{defn|lang=cmn|sort=广04}} [[bed]]

----

==Middle Chinese==

===Han character===
'''床''' (*jrhiɑng)<!--note: asterisk indicates that this character appears more than four times in the Tang Dynasty corpus of literature; the vowel "ɑ" is an IPA symbol and is thus different from the vowel "a"-->

# {{defn|lang=zhx-mid|sort=广04}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[sàng]], [[giàn]], [[giường]], [[sường]], [[giàng]], [[rương]]|sort=广04|rs=广04}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=广04}}

[[zh-min-nan:床]]
[[el:床]]
[[es:床]]
[[fr:床]]
[[gl:床]]
[[ko:床]]
[[lo:床]]
[[lt:床]]
[[li:床]]
[[hu:床]]
[[mg:床]]
[[fj:床]]
[[ja:床]]
[[pl:床]]
[[pt:床]]
[[sm:床]]
[[fi:床]]
[[tl:床]]
[[ta:床]]
[[th:床]]
[[tr:床]]
[[uk:床]]
[[ug:床]]
[[vi:床]]
[[zh:床]]