{{also|气|気|炁}}
==Translingual==

===Etymology===

Original form of [[饩]] ([[餼]]) ("to present rice as a gift"), which is from the same source as [[乞]] ("to [[endow]]; to make [[endow]], to [[beg]]"). Current meaning came from phonetic loan.

Schwartz see it as an {{liushu|ic|rs=气00}} : Steam [[气]] rising from a bowl of rice [[米]].
Schwartz link the rice component to the concept of [[w:Qi|Qi]]. The nourishing vapors of boiling rice represent the Qi, the "vital energy" which make life possible.

But this theory is imcompatible with the original meaning of the character. So the rice vapor should be seen as the etymology of [[饩]]([[餼]]) but not as the etymology of 气(氣).

====References====
* {{reference-book
 | last = Schwartz
 | first = Benjamin
 | year = 1985
 | title = The World of Thought in Ancient China
 | publisher = Harvard University Press
 | location = Cambridge, MA
 | isbn = 9780674043312
}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=84|rad=气|as=06|sn=10|four=8091<sub>7</sub>|canj=人弓火木 (ONFD)}}

# [[air]], [[gas]], [[steam]], [[vapor]]
# [[breath]], [[spirit]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0599.120|dkj=17059|dj=0990.260|hdz=32011.140|uh=6C23|ud=27683|bh=AEF0|bd=44784}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=hei3|y=hei3|sim=气}}

# {{defn|lang=yue|sort=气06}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=|rs=气06}}

# {{defn|lang=ja|sort=气06}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[き]] (ki), [[け]] (ke)|kun=[[いき]] (iki)}}

====Usage notes====
[[Kyūjitai]] ([[simplified]] into [[気]] in Kanji)

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=기|eumhun=|rv=gi|mr=ki|y=ki}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=气06}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|sim=气|pin=[[qì]] ([[qi4]])|wg=ch'i<sup>4</sup>}}

====Compounds====
* {{l|cmn|煤氣鼓}}

===Noun===
{{cmn-noun|t|pin=qì|pint=qi4|tra=氣|sim=气}}

# {{context|Intermediate Mandarin|lang=cmn}} [[air]]; [[gas]]
#: 出去透透氣! chūqù tòu tòu qì!
#:: Go out to breath fresh air!
#: 輪胎漏氣了。lúntāi lòuqì le.
#:: The tire leaks air.
#: [[天然气]] natural gas
# {{context|Intermediate Mandarin|lang=cmn}} [[breath]]
#: [[喘不过气来]] to be out of breath
#: 我會戰斗到最后一口'''氣'''。wǒ huì zhàndòu dào zuìhòu yīkǒuqì .
#:: I will fight to my last breath.
# [[smell]], [[odour]]
#: 把廚炊的煙火'''氣'''從衣服上去掉是很難的。bǎ chú chuī de yānhuǒ qì cóng yīfu shàngqù diào shì hěn nán de.
#:: It is difficult to remove the '''smell''' of cooking from clothes.
#: [[氣味]] smell
# [[weather]]
#: [[天氣]]
# vital energy, life force, [[w:Qi|Qi]] (Chinese philosophy)

===Verb===
{{cmn-verb|t|pin=qì|pint=qi4|tra=氣|sim=气}}

# {{context|Elementary Mandarin|lang=cmn}} to get [[angry]]
#: [[生氣]]
# to make [[angry]], to [[annoy]]
#: 别'''氣'''我! biè '''qì''' wǒ!
#:: Don't '''annoy''' me!
# to [[breath]]


===References===
* {{cite web
| url = http://www.mdbg.net/chindict/chindict.php?page=worddict&wdrst=0&wdqb=氣
| title = 氣
| work = MDBG English to Chinese dictionary ( Based on CC-CEDICT )
| language = Mandarin/English
| accessdate = 2014-02-17}}
* {{cite web
| url = http://www.jukuu.com/index.php
| title = Jukuu
| work = Jukuu
| language = Mandarin/English
}}

----

==Min Nan==

===Hanzi===
{{nan-hanzi|poj=khì, khùi}}

# {{defn|lang=nan}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[khí]]|rs=气06}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=气06}}

[[Category:CJKV characters simplified differently in Japan and China|氣0]]

[[zh-min-nan:氣]]
[[fr:氣]]
[[ko:氣]]
[[hr:氣]]
[[hu:氣]]
[[mg:氣]]
[[ms:氣]]
[[ja:氣]]
[[pl:氣]]
[[pt:氣]]
[[ta:氣]]
[[chr:氣]]
[[vi:氣]]
[[zh:氣]]