{{also|禦}}
{{character info/new}}
==Translingual==

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=60|rad=彳|as=08|asmj+=09|sn=11|snmj+=12|four=27220|canj=HOOML|ids=⿰彳卸}} <!-- For traditional Chinese stroke order, https://www.moedict.tw/御 - For Korean stroke order, https://hanja.dict.naver.com/hanja?q=御 - For Japanese stroke order - https://jisho.org/search/御%20%23kanji -->

====Derived characters====
* {{l|mul|[[𭊷]], [[𣊗]], [[䥏]], [[蓹]], [[篽]], [[𬄧]], [[禦]]}}

====Related characters====
* {{l|mul|[[禦]]}} ''(This character is {{w|Simplified Chinese|simplified}} to ''<big>御</big>'' in mainland China)''

====References====
{{Han ref|kx=0368.230|dkj=10157|dj=0693.050|hdz=20832.160|uh=5FA1}}

----

==Chinese==

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etym}}
{{Han compound|彳|卸|c1=s|c2=s|ls=ic}}.

===Etymology 1===
{{zh-forms}}

====Pronunciation====
{{zh-pron
|m=yù,yà
|c=jyu6,ngaa6
|mn=qz:gīr/tw,xm:gū/twv,zz:gī
|mn-t=ghe6/ghe7
|mn-t_note=ghe6 - "to ride" or "to defend against"; ghe7 - "imperial" 
|mc=y
|oc=y
|cat=a,v
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{lb|zh|prefix}} [[imperial]]
# to [[manage]], to [[govern]] (of the sovereign, by extension, to be present in)
# to [[ride]] (on an [[animal]] or a [[vehicle]] drawn by animals)
# {{zh-alt-form|禦*|to [[defend]] against}}
#: {{zh-x|我 有 旨 蓄，亦 以 御 冬。宴 爾 新 昏、以 我 御 窮。|My fine collection of vegetables, is but a provision against the winter. Feasting with your new wife, you think of me as a provision [only] against your poverty.|ref=Shijing}} <!-- Note: Translation copied verbatim from James Legge original translation. -->

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|御饌|御溝題葉|乘奔御風|御覽|媵御|御駕親征|僮御|御輪|御案|御花園|御溝流葉|嬪御|御前|御河|御筆|御手|御醫|女御|御龍|御駕|御風|御道|御賜|御者|御狀|御溝|御札|御書房|御旨|御容|御宇|御夫座|御史雨|御史臺|御史大夫|御史|御仗|御人|御世|御氣|御書|御林軍|御碑亭|御膳房|享御|御極|侍御|御用|告御狀|御苑|御廚|御製|御寶|晏御揚揚|控御|日御|月御|服御|監察御史|盜御馬|窺御激夫|馮虛御風|長轡遠御|統御|耕御路|駕御|酌古御今|鐵面御史|繡衣御史}}

===Etymology 2===
{{zh-see|禦|3=to [[defend]]}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=c|rs=彳08}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=ご
|kanon=ぎょ
|kun=お-, おおむ-, おおん-, おん-, み-
}}

====Compounds====
* {{ja-r|御者|ぎょしゃ}}
* {{ja-r|制御|せいぎょ}}
* {{ja-r|防御|ぼうぎょ}}

====See also====
* {{l|ja|馭}}

===Etymology 1===
<!-- Technically, the two pronunciations/readings here should be split into separate etyls -- "o" from JA, "go" from ZHO -- but that would make the usage note confusing. -->

====Prefix====
{{ja-pos|prefix|お|ご}}

# Prefix indicating that the word is honorific. Often used to indicate that the word belongs or is related to the listener (as opposed to the speaker).

=====Usage notes=====
This prefix is frequently written in hiragana, both because it is complicated and common, and because its reading may be ambiguous if the term is unfamiliar. When the prefix is read as ''o-'' (as opposed to ''go-''), it is almost exclusively written in hiragana.

While in general this prefix is optional, in many cases it is so commonly used that the base word can no longer be used in isolation, as in [[御飯]] (ごはん, gohan, rice) – the form ×飯 *''han'' is not used alone, though it can be used as parts of compounds (such as [[炊飯]], ''suihan''), and the character can be read in isolation as ''meshi''.

Usage varies between speakers, situations, and gender – more polite speech, especially by women, features more use of this prefix, while blunt speech, especially by men, uses it less or not at all (words where the prefix has become mandatory are replaced by blunter terms that do not have the prefix). In rare cases a prefixed term has become impolite, as in {{m|ja|御前|tr=omae||you (familiar or derogatory)}}.

This character is generally read as お (o-) when it is prefixed to words considered to be of Japanese origin, as in [[御水]] (おみず, ''omizu'', ''water''), and ご (go-) when it is prefixed to words considered to be of Chinese origin, as in [[御主人]] (ごしゅじん, ''goshujin'', ''husband''). There are numerous exceptions, however, such as [[お電話]]. For (non-Chinese) foreign loan words ([[外来語]], [[gairaigo]]), this prefix is seldom used, and both お- and ご- may be used, but お- is somewhat preferred, as in [[おビール]] (''o-bīru'') for beer.

In some rare cases, it is pronounced み (''mi-''), primarily for religious words, pertaining to gods or the emperor, as in [[御輿]] (''mikoshi,'' a type of shrine). However, in this context it is often replaced by [[神]] ("god", also pronounced ''mi-''), and then a further 御 (pronounced お, ''o-'') may be added, as in [[御神輿]] (''o-mi-koshi''). The ''mi-'' prefix also became merged into other kanji, as in [[宮]] (''miya,'' imperial palace).

In rare cases, this is used as a suffix instead, notably in [[甥御]] ''oigo'' and [[姪御]] ''meigo'' (your nephew, your niece).

御 (お, ''o-'') should not be confused with [[大]] (おお, ''ō-,'' great), which is a less-commonly used prefix.

See [[w:Honorific speech in Japanese#Honorific prefixes|Honorific prefixes in Japanese]] for further discussion.

===Etymology 2===
From {{etyl|ojp|ja|sort=み}}. Cognate with {{l|ja|霊}} / {{m|ja|神|tr=mi||spirit, god}}, as this prefix was originally used to refer to gods and other spiritually important things.

====Prefix====
{{ja-pos|prefix|み|rom=mi}}

# Honorific prefix added to gods and other spiritually important things. Also added to other nouns to indicate godlike respect.
# Added to place names to emphasize beauty. (This usage is more often written in hiragana)

=====Derived terms=====
* {{ja-r|御明|みあかし}}: an oil lamp lit for Shinto or Buddhist purposes
* {{ja-r|御食|みけ}}: an offering of food to a god or spirit
* {{ja-r|御子|みこ}}: a shrine maiden
* {{ja-r|御輿|みこし}}, {{ja-r|神輿|みこし}}: a portable shrine
* {{ja-r|尊|みこと}}, {{ja-r|命|みこと}}: a title used for gods and emperors, and other exalted personages
* {{ja-r|御許|みもと}}: the location of a god, Buddha, emperor, or other object of reverence
* {{ja-r|御座|みまし}}: the presence of a god, Buddha, emperor, or other object of reverence
* {{ja-r|宮|みや}}: a shrine

=====Alternative forms=====
* {{l|ja|み}}
* {{sense|beautiful place}} {{l|ja|美}}
* {{sense|beautiful place}} {{l|ja|深}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=[[어]], [[아]]|eumhun=|rv=eo, a|mr=ŏ, a|y=e, a}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=彳08}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[ngự]], [[ngợ]], [[ngừ]], [[ngừa]]|rs=彳08}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=彳08}}