{{also|旒|荒|巟|充}}
{{character info}}
==Translingual==

===Alternative forms===
* This character appears differently when it is used as a character component placed on the right (see derived characters below):
** In mainland China (based on ''{{w|Xin Zixing}}'' character form), Japanese [[kanji]], Korean [[hanja]] and Vietnamese [[Nôm]], the upper component {{l|mul|sc=Jpan|𠫓}} is written {{l|mul|⿱[[亠]][[厶]]}} (4 strokes) while the bottom right stroke is written <big>{{l|mul|乚}}</big> with an ending hook which is the historical form found in the {{w|Kangxi Dictionary}}.
** In Taiwan and Hong Kong (based on {{w|Big5}} character form), the upper component {{l|mul|sc=Hant|𠫓}} is written {{l|mul|⿻[[一]][[厶]]}} (3 strokes) while the bottom right stroke is written <big>{{l|mul|㇄}}</big> without the ending hook.

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=8|rad=亠|as=05|sn=7|four=00212|canj=YIHU|ids=⿱亠𠫝(GJ),⿳亠厶⿲丿丨㇄(T)}} <!-- Note: Do not use ⿱𠫓𫶧 because 𠫓 consists of ⿻一厶 for GT and ⿱亠厶 for J -->

====Derived characters====
* <big>{{l|mul|[[𢏭]], [[㧧]], [[旈]], [[𭦓]], [[𨓞]], [[𥆨]], [[锍]], [[巯]], [[𦈷]], [[𦎓]], [[𮗲]], [[𧨆]], [[酼]], [[𠡤]], [[𢂙]]}}</big> ''(Contains {{l|mul|𠫓|⿱亠厶}} at top right for all regions including Taiwan and Hong Kong if the character is used)''
* <big>{{l|mul|sc=Hant|[[㤺]]}}</big> ''(Exception: Only for Taiwan and Japan character form which contains {{l|mul|𠫓|⿱亠厶}} at top right. Mainland China character form contains <big>{{l|mul|巟}}</big> instead ({{l|mul|sc=Hans|亡}} at top right))''
* <big>{{l|mul|sc=Hant|[[鋶]]}}</big> ''(Exception: Contains {{l|mul|𠫓|⿱亠厶}} at top right for mainland China and Hong Kong character form. Contains {{l|mul|𠫓|⿻一厶}} at top right for Taiwan character form)''
* <big>{{l|mul|[[𪠻]], [[流]], [[梳]], [[㲙]], [[琉]], [[硫]], [[疏]], [[𥹷]], [[𦀠]], [[艈]], [[䖻]], [[裗]], [[䟽]], [[𨌙]], [[毓]], [[巰]], [[鯍]], [[𤭕]], [[𧰖]], [[𣹳]], [[麍]], [[𪎣]]}}</big> ''(Exception: Contains {{l|mul|𠫓|⿱亠厶}} at top right for all regions except Taiwan and Hong Kong which uses {{l|mul|𠫓|⿻一厶}} at top right for these characters)''

====References====
{{Han ref|kx=0088.150|hdz=10284.040|uh=342C}}

----

==Chinese==

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etym}}
{{liushu|p}}: a newborn baby, shown upside down. The upper portion is an inverted [[子]]. The three lower lines represent amniotic fluid or hair, the latter interpretation thought almost certainly incorrect by Henshall.<ref>Henshall, Kenneth G. (1998). A Guide to Remembering Japanese Characters (2nd ed.). Singapore: Tuttle Publishing. p. 124. {{ISBN|978-0-8048-2038-7}}</ref> The interpretation as fluid is supported by the comparison of {{l|zh|旒}} and {{l|zh|游}}, originally variants of one another.  (Note that the oracle bone form of 子 also depicted hair.){{rfv-etym|mul}}

===Etymology 1===
{{zh-see|荒|v}}

===Etymology 2===
{{zh-see|不|v}}

===Etymology 3===
{{zh-see|巟|v}}

===Etymology 4===
{{zh-see|旒|v}}

===Etymology 5===
{{zh-see|𠫓|v}}

===References===
<references/>

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=류|rv=ryu|mr=ryu|y=lyu|eumhun=깃발|ehrv=gitbal|ehmr=kitpal|ehy=kispal}}

# {{rfdef|ko|sort=亠05}}