==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Etymology===
{{liushu|p}}: a woman with breasts kneeling or standing. In modern form turned on left side: enclosed area is remnant of left breast (character's left, depicted woman's right), while right breast has disappeared. Cognate to {{term|母||mother|sc=Hani}}, which has developed similarly, but also includes dots for nipples and has retained both breasts.

{{Han etyl}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=38|rad=女|as=00|sn=3|four=4040<sub>0</sub>|canj=女 (V)}}

# [[female]], [[woman]], [[girl]]
# [[feminine]]
# rad. 38

====Antonyms====
* [[男]]

====Descendants====
* [[め]]
* [[メ]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0254.220|dkj=06036|dj=0516.190|hdz=21023.230|uh=5973|ud=22899|bh=A46B|bd=42091}}

----

==Ancient Chinese==

===Note===
{{rfc-header|Note}}
It can also be used as a character meaning "you" (and can be used when addressing a man as well as a woman) pronounced "rú" in Mandarin, for which [[汝]] character was borrowed in Han period (originally 汝 Rú was the name of the river in Henan).
Example: 子曰：「女器也」 (Master said: "You are a goblet", Lun Yu, 5.4, [http://zh.wikisource.org/wiki/論語/公冶長第五])

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=jyu5, neoi5, neoi6|y=neui5}}

# {{defn|Cantonese|sort=女00}}

----

==Japanese==
===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=1|rs=女00}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[じょ]] (jo), [[にょ]] (nyo), [[にょう]] (nyō)|kun=[[おんな]] (onna), [[め]] (me), [[むすめ]] (musume)}}

====Compounds====
{{top2}}
* [[女郎花]] ([[おみなえし]], [[ominaeshi]]) [[patrinia]]
* [[女親]] ([[おんなおや]], [[onnaoya]]) [[female]] [[parent]]
* [[女形]] ([[おんながた]], [[onnagata]]) [[male actor in female role]] of [[Kabuki]]
* [[女心]] ([[おんなごころ]], [[onnagokoro]]) [[woman's mind]]
* [[女手]] ([[おんなで]], [[onnade]]) [[female worker]]
* [[女友達]] ([[おんなともだち]], [[onnatomodachi]]) [[girlfriend]], [[female]] [[friend]]
* [[孝女]] ([[こうじょ]], [[koujo]]) [[filial daughter]]
* [[工女]] ([[こうじょ]], [[koujo]]) [[female worker]]
* [[皇女]] ([[こうじょ]], [[koujo]]) [[imperial princess]]
* [[女医]] ([[じょい]], [[joi]]) [[doctoress]]
* [[女王]] ([[じょうおう]], [[jouou]]) [[queen]]
* [[女系]] ([[じょけい]], [[jokei]]) [[woman-succession]]
* [[女傑]] ([[じょけつ]], [[joketsu]]) [[brave]] [[woman]]
* [[女権]] ([[じょけん]], [[joken]]) [[woman rights]]
* [[女史]] ([[じょし]], [[joshi]]) [[Ms]]
* [[処女]] ([[しょじょ]], [[shojo]]) [[virgin]], [[maiden]]
{{mid2}}
* [[女子]] ([[じょし]], [[joshi]]) [[girl]]
* [[女児]] ([[じょじ]], [[joji]]) [[female infant]]
* [[女性]] ([[じょせい]], [[josei]]) [[woman]]
* [[女声]] ([[じょせい]], [[josei]]) [[female voice]]
* [[女婿]] ([[じょせい]], [[josei]]) [[son-in-law]]
* [[女中]] ([[じょちゅう]], [[jochuu]]) [[maid]]
* [[女帝]] ([[じょてい]], [[jotei]]) [[empress]]
* [[女優]] ([[じょゆう]], [[joyuu]]) [[actress]]
* [[女流]] ([[じょりゅう]], [[joryuu]]) [[female]]
* [[女郎]] ([[じょろう]], [[jorou]]) [[prostitute]]
* [[女房]] ([[にょうぼう]], [[nyoubou]]) [[wife]]
* [[女官]] ([[にょかん]], [[nyokan]]) [[court]] [[lady]]
* [[女将]] ([[にょしょう]], [[nyoshou]]) [[mistress]], [[hostess]]
* [[女人]] ([[にょにん]], [[nyonin]]) [[woman]]
* [[女神]] ([[めがみ]], [[megami]]) [[goddess]]
{{bottom}}

===Etymology 1===
/womi<small>1</small>na/ > /womina/ > /omina/. The initial /wo/ expressed "small, youth" and contrasted with /o/ "grown, old" (as in [[嫗|omina]] "old woman"). The medial /m/ is cognate with {{term|女|me|female, woman}}.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=おみな|hhira=をみな|rom=omina}}

# young woman
# a woman

===Etymology 2===
wonna > onna. From earlier /womina/. The initial /wo/ expressed "small, youth" and contrasted with /o/ "grown, old" (as in [[嫗|omina]] "old woman"). The medial /n/, from earlier /m/, is cognate with {{term|女|me|female, woman}}.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=おんな|hhira=をんな|rom=onna}}

# a [[woman]]

===Etymology 3===
/me<small>1</small>/ > /me/.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=め|rom=me}}

# female
# woman
# wife
#* c. 890: [[w:Taketori Monogatari|Taketori Monogatari]] (page 3)
#*: '''女（め）'''の女にあづけてやしなはす。

=====Derived terms=====
* [[妹]] (imo)
* [[郎女]] (iratsume)
* [[姫]] (hime)
* [[女神]] (megami)
* [[女君]] (megimi)
* [[姪]] (mei)
* [[牝鹿]] (meka)
* [[女子]] (meko)
* [[女の子]] (me no ko)
* [[乳母]] (menoto)
* [[女親]] (meoya)
* [[雌]] (mesu)
* [[雌鳥]] (medori)
* [[婚く]] (memaku)
* [[女々しい]] (memeshii)
* [[娶る]] (metoru)
* [[牝馬]] (meuma, mema)
* [[牝牛]], [[雌牛]] (meushi)
* [[女]] (omina, onna)
* [[嫗]] (omina)
* [[母]] (omo)
* [[乙女]] (otome)
* [[浮女]] (ukareme)

===References===

* {{reference-book
  | last = Horiuchi
  | first = Hideaki
  | coauthors = Ken Akiyama
  | title = [[w:Taketori Monogatari|Taketori Monogatari]] , [[w:Ise Monogatari|Ise Monogatari]]
  | publisher = [[w:Iwanami Shoten Publishing|Iwanami Shoten]]
  | date = 1997
  | location = Tōkyō
  | id = ISBN 4-00-240017-4
  }}

[[Category:1000 Japanese basic words|おんな]]

===See also===
* [[雌|mesu]]
* [[嫗|onna]]
* [[くノ一]] ([[kunoichi]])

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=[[녀]]([[여]])|rv=nyeo(yeo)|mr=nyŏ(yŏ)|y=nye(<sup>n</sup>ye)|eumhun=계집|ehrv=gyejip|ehmr=kyejip|ehy=kyeycip}}

# ([[계집]] 녀, ''gyeojip-''): [[female]], [[woman]], [[wife]]. <!-- unwarranted: the [[fair sex]] -->

[[Category:Hanja readings|녀]]

----

==Mandarin==

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|zh-nǚ.ogg|audio}}

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[nǚ]] ([[nü3]]), [[rǔ]] ([[ru3]])|wg=nü<sup>3</sup>}}

# {{defn|Mandarin|sort=女00}}

====Compounds====
{{top4}}
* [[女伴]]
* [[女扮男装]]
* [[女宾]]
* [[女傧相]]
* [[女兵]]
* [[女厕]]
* [[女车]]
* [[女大不中留]]
* [[女大十八变]] ([[女大十八變]])
* [[女低音]]
* [[女儿]]
* [[女儿酒]]
* [[女儿墙]]
* [[女方]]
{{mid4}}
* [[女高音]]
* [[女工]]
* [[女红]]
* [[女孩儿]]
* [[女护士]]
* [[女皇]]
* [[女家]]
* [[女监]]
* [[女将]]
* [[女眷]]
* [[女郎]]
* [[女里女气]]
* [[女流]]
* [[女朋友]] [[girlfriend]]
{{mid4}}
* [[女仆]]
* [[女墙]]
* [[女强人]]
* [[女权]]
* [[女权主义]]
* [[女人]]
* [[女人心，海底针]] ([[女人心，海底針]])
* [[女色]]
* [[女神]]
* [[女生]]
* [[女声]]
* [[女士]]
* [[女娲]]
{{mid4}}
* [[女王]]
* [[女巫]]
* [[女性]]
* [[女婿]]
* [[女佣]]
* [[女中音]]
* [[女主角]]
* [[女主人]]
* [[女装]]
* [[女子]]
* [[女子无才便是德]] ([[女子無才便是德]])
{{bottom}}

[[Category:Mandarin entries with audio links]]

----

==Middle Chinese==

===Han character===
'''女''' (*[[niǔ]], *[[njiǔ]])<!--note: asterisk indicates that this character appears more than four times in the Tang Dynasty corpus of literature-->

# {{defn|Middle Chinese|sort=女00}}

----

==Min Nan==

===Hanzi===
{{nan-hanzi|poj=lú (lu<sup>2</sup>), lí (li<sup>2</sup>)}}

# {{defn|Min Nan}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[nữ]], [[nữa]], [[lỡ]], [[nhỡ]], [[nớ]], [[nợ]], [[nỡ]], [[nự]]|rs=女00}}

# {{defn|Vietnamese|sort=女00}}

[[da:女]]
[[et:女]]
[[es:女]]
[[fr:女]]
[[ko:女]]
[[it:女]]
[[rw:女]]
[[lo:女]]
[[la:女]]
[[lt:女]]
[[li:女]]
[[hu:女]]
[[mg:女]]
[[ms:女]]
[[ja:女]]
[[tpi:女]]
[[pl:女]]
[[pt:女]]
[[ro:女]]
[[ru:女]]
[[fi:女]]
[[uk:女]]
[[vi:女]]
[[zh:女]]