{{also|丌}}
{{character info/new}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|strokes=8}}
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=12|rad=八|as=06|sn=8|four=44801|canj=TMMC|ids=⿴共𠄠}}

====Derived characters====
* [[倛]] [[掑]] [[唭]] [[帺]] [[猉]] [[淇]] [[娸]] [[騏]] ([[骐]]) [[琪]] [[棋]] [[祺]] [[稘]] [[褀]] [[蜞]] [[粸]] [[綨]] [[踑]] [[諆]] [[錤]] ([[𫓹]]) [[鯕]] ([[鲯]]) [[鶀]] [[麒]] [[剘]] [[斯]] [[期]] [[欺]] [[𤿺]] [[萁]] [[箕]] [[基]] [[棊]] [[朞]] [[惎]] [[碁]] [[蜝]] [[綦]] [[諅]] [[魌]] [[旗]]

====See also====
* {{l|mul|甚}} <!-- visually similar -->

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0127.180|dkj=01472|dj=0286.100|hdz=10245.010|uh=5176|ud=20854|bh=A8E4|bd=43236}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|alt=丌,亓}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etym}}
In the oracle bone script, it was originally {{zh-l|𠀠}}, a {{liushu|p|nocap=1}} of a [[basket]].

In the bronze inscriptions, {{och-l|丌}} was added under the basket to represent a [[stand]]. It may also have acted as a phonetic component.

Later borrowed for an Old Chinese pronoun. The derivative {{och-l|箕}} refers to the original word.

===Etymology===
; ''third-person possessive pronoun''
: {{zh-ref|Schuessler (2007)}} notes its origin not certain because in the linguistic area pronouns tend to be of the shape KV (K=velar stop; V=vowel). Perhaps Sino-Tibetan; compare {{cog|lus|khi||that}}, {{cog|bo|-ཀྱི, -གྱི||''genitive suffix''}}, but a Tibeto-Burman /a/ should be expected in this set. Alternatively, {{cog|aav-pro|*ki/ke ~ *ku/ko||''third person pronoun''}} whose earliest form is perhaps ''*kɨ'' ({{zh-ref|Pinnow, 1965}}) appears to be phonologically closest to the OC word. {{och-l|其|id=2}} may be related to {{och-l|渠|he}}.

; ''modal particle'' "should; probably"
: Probably cognate with {{och-l|期|id=1|stipulated time; time}}, {{och-l|期|id=2|year}} ({{zh-ref|Serruys, 1982}}).

===Pronunciation 1===
{{zh-pron
|m=qí
|c=kei4
|h=pfs=khì
|md=gì
|mn=kî
|mn-t=ki5
|w=3jji
|mc=1
|oc=1+2,2
|ma=
|cat=pron,det,suf,md:part,pn
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{†}} [[he]]; [[she]]; [[it]]; [[they]]; [[one]]
#: {{zh-x|投其所好{hào}|to adapt to somebody's taste (''lit.'' to cater to that which '''one''' likes)}}
#* {{zh-x|秦 王 恐 其 破 璧，乃 辭謝 固 請。|The king of Qin feared he would smash the jade, and thus apologized and begged him not to do so.|CL|ref=Shiji}}
#* {{zh-x|余 嘉 其 能 行 古道，作《師說》以 貽 之。|I would like to praise him for following the ancient customs, so I composed this piece as a gift to him.|CL|ref={{w2|zh|韓愈}}, {{lang|zh|《師說》}}}}
# {{†}} [[his]]; [[her]]; [[its]]; [[their]]
#: {{zh-x|各司其職|each person performs '''his''' own function}}
#* {{zh-x|子 曰：「父 在，觀 其 志；父 沒，觀 其 行；三 年 無 改 於 父 之 道，可謂 孝 矣。」|The Master said, "While a man's father is alive, look at the bent of '''his''' will; when his father is dead, look at '''his''' conduct. If for three years he does not alter from the way of his father, he may be called filial."|ref=Analects}}
#* {{zh-x|臣 弒 其 君 可 乎？|May a minister then put '''his''' sovereign to death?|ref=Mengzi}}
#* {{zh-x|甘橘，^大厘 城 有 之，其 味 酸。|Dali City has sweet tangerines, but '''their''' flavour is sour.|CL|ref={{RQ:Manshu|7|Tea, Trees, Herbs and Fruits|7}}}}
# {{†}} [[that]]; [[those]]
#* {{zh-x|臣 竊 以為 其 人 勇士，有 智謀。|In my humble opinion '''that''' person is brave and wise.|CL|ref=Shiji}}
#* {{zh-x|惑 而 不 從師，其 為 惑 也，終 不 解 矣。|If one is confused yet does not learn from a teacher, '''those''' doubts can never be cleared.|CL|ref={{w2|zh|韓愈}}, {{lang|zh|《師說》}}}}
# {{†}} among which; [[therein]]
#* {{zh-x|寺僧 使 小僮 持 斧，於 亂石 間，擇 其 一二 叩 之，硿{kōng}硿{kōng} 然。|The temple monk let his young servant hold an axe, and '''among''' the rocks pick one or two spots and strike at them. A sonorous sound was produced.|CL|ref={{w2|zh|蘇軾}}, {{lang|zh|《石鐘山記》}}}}
# {{†}} [[probably]]; [[perhaps]]
#: {{zh-syn|大概|或許}}
#* {{zh-x|知 進退 存亡 而 不 失 其 正 者，'''其''' 唯 聖人 乎！|The person who knows to advance and to retire, to maintain and to let perish, without ever acting incorrectly, can '''probably''' only be the sage!|ref=Yijing}}
#* {{zh-x|子曰：「不 怨 天，不 尤 人。下 學 而 上 達。知 我 者，其 天 乎！」|The Master replied, "I do not murmur against Heaven. I do not grumble against men. My studies lie low, and my penetration rises high. There is '''probably''' only Heaven who knows me!"|ref=Analects-W}}
#* {{zh-x|微 管仲，吾 其 被髮左衽 矣。|But without Guan Zhong, we '''should''' now be wearing our hair unbound, and the lappets of our coats buttoning on the left side.|ref=Analects-W}}
# {{†}} {{lb|zh|adverb indicating a rhetorical question}}
#: {{zh-syn|豈}}
#* {{zh-x|若 火 之 燎 于 原，不可向邇，其 猶 可 撲滅？|When a fire is blazing in the flames so that it cannot be approached, '''can''' it still be beaten out?|ref=Shangshu}}
#* {{zh-x|晉 不可 啟，寇 不可 玩；一 之 謂 甚，其 可 再 乎！|The greed of Jin is not to be triggered; robbers are not to be ignored. Once is already too much; '''how''' can there be a second occurrence?|ref=Zuozhuan}}
#* {{zh-x|國 無 主，其 能 久 乎？|Without a monarch, '''how''' can a state last long?|ref=Shiji}}
#* {{zh-x|嗚呼！其 真 無 馬 邪{yé}？|Alas! Is there really no thousand-''li'' horse?|ref={{w2|zh|韓愈}}, {{lang|zh|《馬說》}}}}
# {{†}} {{lb|zh|adverb indicating imperative}}
#* {{zh-x|吾子 其 無 廢 先君 之 功！|'''Do not''' you, my friend, nullify his merit!|ref=Zuozhuan}}
#* {{zh-x|秦王 使 人 謂 ^安陵君 曰：「寡人 欲 以 五百 里 之 地 易 ^安陵，^安陵君 其 許 寡人！」|The king of Qin dispatched envoys to tell Anling Jun, "I would like to exchange five hundred ''li''s of land" for Anling. Please accept my offer!"|ref=Zhanguoce}}
# {{†}} [[if]]
#* {{zh-x|王 知 夫 苗 乎？七 八 月 之間 旱，則 苗 槁 矣。天 油然 作 雲，沛然 下雨，則 苗 浡然 興 之 矣。其 如是，孰 能 禦 之？|Does your Majesty understand the way of the growing grain? During the seventh and eighth months, when drought prevails, the plants become dry. Then the clouds collect densely in the heavens, they send down torrents of rain, and the grain erects itself, as if by a shoot. '''If''' so, who can keep it back?|ref=Mengzi}}
#* {{zh-x|其 隙 也，則 施{yí}施{yí} 而 行，漫漫 而 遊。|'''If''' I am free, I will walk slowly and travel unrestrainedly.|CL|ref={{w2|zh|柳宗元}}, {{lang|zh|《始得西山宴遊記》}}}}
# {{†}} {{lb|zh|conjunction indicating a question with choices}} [[or]]
#* {{zh-x|公文軒 見 ^右師 而 驚 曰：「是 何人 也？惡乎 介 也？天 與{yú}，其 人 與{yú}？」|When Gong-wen Xian saw the Master of the Left, he was startled, and said, 'What sort of man is this? How is it he has but one foot? Is it from Heaven? '''Or''' from Man?' |ref=Zhuangzi}}
#* {{zh-x|嗚呼！言 有 窮 而 情 不可 終，汝 其 知 也 邪{yé}？其 不 知 也 邪{yé}？|Alas! My words can end but my grief cannot. Do you know? '''Or''' do you not know?|ref={{w2|zh|韓愈}}, {{lang|zh|《祭十二郎文》}}}}
# {{lb|zh|Min Dong}} {{n-g|Possessive particle.}}
# {{surname|zh}}

=====Synonyms=====
{{zh-dial|他}}
{{zh-dial|的}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|不憚其煩|居其大半|各異其趣|乘其不意|其他|兩全其美|名副其實|其間|其勢洶洶|其後|含糊其辭|奉其正朔|其次|地盡其利|大行其道|各從其志|吠非其主|乘其不備|其高|張大其事|不乏其人|各司其事|不計其數|允執其中|得其所|各得其宜|其樂無比|哲人其萎|不堪其擾|尤其|其應若響|慎重其事|不解其故|其來有自|微乎其微|卡其布|其程|恭逢其盛|其實|徒有其名|廁身其間|忘其所以|各展其長|上下其手|得其所哉|得其三昧|以售其奸|勉為其難|張大其詞|不其然|名過其實|出其不意|不厭其煩|其味無窮|其樂融融|復蹈其轍|何其|充其量|不厭其詳|其貌不揚|反其真|二三其德|其樂無窮|坐享其成|二三其意|大張其詞|大抬其槓|名符其實|天誘其衷|不得其死|其從如雲|大異其趣|其情可憫|其餘|恰如其分|土耳其語|土耳其浴|土耳其|不勝其擾|不勝其煩|不安其室|其內|出其不備|吞吐其辭|各行其是|各盡其用|各為其主|各得其所|其今|以售其技|出其東門|其外|其中|三緘其口|五世其昌|各行其志|其樂不窮|會逢其適|望其肩項|泰山其頹|欺以其方|死得其所|望其項背|知幾其神|盡其所長|神乎其神|用其所長|用非其人|玉成其事|望其肩背|物傷其類|擊其不意|投其所好|物盡其用|梁木其壞|獨行其是|盡其在我|直呼其名|掩其不備|突如其來|玉成其美|捨我其誰|樂在其中|神乎其技|我行其野|理過其辭|瞠乎其後|窮極其妙|洞燭其奸|掩其無備|洞察其奸|獨行其道|獨善其身|懷璧其罪|無出其右|攻其不備|極其|曲盡其妙|求其友聲|攻其無備|殷其靁|樂觀其成|確有其事|果如其言|果不其然|杼軸其空|支吾其詞|文如其人|置身其中|莫明其妙|繩其祖武|闃其無人|舍我其誰|莫名其妙|躬逢其盛|順其自然|聽其自然|身當其境|自取其咎|遂其所願|誇大其辭|適得其所|誇誇其談|首當其衝|鬼瞰其室|閃爍其詞|自食其果|過甚其實|難辭其咎|自得其樂|阿其所好|高下其手|薩其馬|誇張其辭|譽過其實|自食其力|靜觀其變|隱約其辭|貨暢其流|身臨其境|自圓其說|與其|適逢其會|適得其反|過甚其詞|這其間|自取其禍|言過其實|自取其辱|虛有其表|鄭重其事|罄其所有|有其父必有其子}}

===Pronunciation 2===
{{zh-pron
|m=jī
|c=gei1
|h=
|md=
|mn=
|w=
|mc=2
|oc=n,1
|ma=
|cat=part,pn
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{†}} {{n-g|Used at the end of a sentence to show [[doubt]].}}
# {{†}} {{zh-used2|n}}
#: {{zh-x|^酈 食{Yì}-其{jī}|{{w|Li Yiji}} (an advisor to Liu Bang)}}

===References===
* {{qualifier|Hakka}} {{R:hak:Lau 1997}}
* {{qualifier|Min Nan}} {{thcwd|3600}}

{{zh-cat|Intermediate}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=n|rs=八06}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=ぎ, ご
|kanon=き
|kun=そ-の, そ-れ, それ-, し
}}

====Compounds====
* {{ja-r|其れ|それ}}
* {{ja-r|其の|その}}
* {{ja-r|其処|そこ}}
* {{ja-r|其方|そちら}}
* {{ja-r|其れ共|それとも}}

===Pronoun===
{{ja-pos|pronoun|し}}

# {{lb|ja|archaic|sort=し}} [[that]]
# [[you]]
# [[oneself]]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=기}}

# {{rfdef|ko|sort=八06}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[kì]], [[kỳ]], [[cà]], [[khởi]]|rs=八06}}

# {{rfdef|vi|sort=八06}}