{{also|亊}}<!-- may be replaced by zh-forms -->
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=6|rad=亅|as=07|sn=8|four=5000<sub>7</sub>|canj=十中中弓 (JLLN)}}

# [[affair]], [[matter]], [[business]]
# to [[serve]]
# [[accident]], [[incident]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0085.240|dkj=00241|dj=0174.150|hdz=10023.030|uh=4E8B|ud=20107|bh=A8C6|bd=43206}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=|y=si6}}

# {{defn|Cantonese|sort=亅07}}

----

==Japanese==

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|k|hira=こと|rom=koto}}

# abstract [[thing]], [[affair]], [[matter]], [[fact]]
#: ささいな'''事'''だ。
#:: ささいな'''こと'''だ。
#:: ''Sasai na '''koto''' da.''
#::: It is a trivial '''matter'''.
# [[act]] (''word used for the nominalization of verbs, adjectives, or phrases'')
#: ある程度まで私はあなたの言う'''事'''に賛成です。
#:: あるていどまでわたしはあなたのいう'''こと'''にさんせいです。
#:: ''Aru teido made watashi wa anata no iu '''koto''' ni sansei desu.''
#::: I agree with what you say to some extent.
# event of special importance [[affair]], [[something]], [[incident]], [[case]], [[occurrence]], [[trouble]]
#: 大変な'''事'''が起こった。
#:: たいへんな'''こと'''がおこった。
#:: ''Taihen na '''koto''' ga okotta.''
#::: A terrible '''accident''' occurred
# business matters, [[affairs]], [[business]], [[work]], [[duty]]
#: 慌てて'''事'''を運ぶとミスをしますよ。
#:: あわてて'''こと'''をはこぶとミスをしますよ。
#:: ''Awatete '''koto''' o hakobu to misu o shimasu yo.''
#::: You make mistakes if you do '''things''' in a hurry.
# [[things]], [[occasions]], [[circumstances]], [[details]], [[particulars]]
#: 彼は学校を遅刻する'''事'''が有る。
#:: かれはがっこうをちこくする'''こと'''がある。
#:: ''Kare wa gakkō o chikoku suru '''koto''' ga aru.''
#::: He is sometimes late for school.
# [[worthwhileness]], [[reason]]
#: いやしくもなすに足る'''事'''なら立派にやるだけの価値がある。
#:: いやしくもなすにたる'''こと'''ならりっぱにやるだけのかちがある。
#:: ''Iyashiku mo nasu ni taru '''koto''' nara rippa ni yaru dake no kachi ga aru.''
#::: If it is worth doing at all it is worth doing well
# [[experience]]
#: 京都に行った'''事'''が有りますか。
#:: きょうとにいった'''こと'''がありますか。
#:: ''Kyōto ni itta '''koto''' ga arimasu ka.''
#::: Have you ever been to Kyoto?

====Usage notes====
事 is used for abstract things such as actions or a concepts, whereas [[物]] is used for more concrete things.

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=3|rs=亅07}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[じ]] (''ji''), [[ず]] (''zu'')|kun=[[こと]] (''koto''), [[つかう]] ([[事う]], ''tsukau''), [[つかえる]] ([[事える]], ''tsukaeru'')|nanori=[[ろ]] (''ro'')}}

====Compounds====
{{rel-top3|compounds containing "事"}}
* [[事々]], [[事事]] (''kotogoto''): everything
* [[事案]] (''jian''): concern
* [[事宜]] (''jigi''): fitting thing
* [[事共]] (''kotodomo''): things, matters
* [[事業]] (''jigyō''): project, enterprise
* [[事局]] (''jikyoku''): circumstances
* [[事件]] (''jiken''): event, affair
* [[事故]] (''jiko''): accident, incident
* [[事後]] (''jigo''): after-, post-
* [[事項]] (''jikō''): matters, articles
* [[事実]] (''jijitsu''): as a matter of fact
* [[事象]] (''jishō''): event, phenomenon
* [[事情]] (''jijō''): circumstances, consideration
* [[事績]] (''jiseki''): achievement, exploit
* [[事迹]], [[事跡]], [[事蹟]] (''jiseki''): evidence, trace
* [[事前]] (''jizen''): prior, beforehand
* [[事相]] (''jisō''): aspect, phase
* [[事態]], [[事体]] (''jitai''): situation, state of affairs
* [[事大]] (''jidai''): subservient to the stronger
* [[事典]] (''jiten''): encyclopedia
* [[事犯]] (''jihan''): crime
* [[事物]] (''jibutsu''): things, affairs
* [[事柄]] (''kotogara''): matter, thing
* [[事変]] (''jihen''): accident, disaster
{{rel-mid3}}
* [[事由]] (''jiyū''): reason, cause
* [[事理]] (''jiri''): reason, facts
* [[事例]] (''jirei''): example, precedent
* [[返事]] (''henji''): answer, reply
* [[房事]] (''bōji''): sex, lovemaking
* [[記事]] (''kiji''): news, account
* [[食事]] (''shokuji''): meal, dinner
* [[無事]] (''buji''): safety, peace
* [[火事]] (''kaji''): fire
* [[事務]] (''jimu''): business, clerical work
* [[事業]] (''jigyō''): undertaking, achievement
* [[用事]] (''yōji''): things to do
* [[家事]] (''kaji''): household affairs
* [[軍事]] (''gunji''): naval and military affairs
* [[工事]] (''kōji''): construction
* [[人事]] (''jinji''): human affairs
* [[知事]] (''chiji''): prefecture governor
* [[刑事]] (''keiji''): police detective
* [[判事]] (''hanji''): judge
* [[幹事]] (''kanji''): manager, organizer
* [[領事]] (''ryōji''): consul
* [[理事]] (''riji''): director, trustee
* [[物事]] (''monogoto''): things, everything
{{rel-mid3}}
* [[仕事]] (''shigoto''): work, employment
* [[見事]], [[美事]] (''migoto''): splendid, magnificent
* [[事務室]] (''jimushitsu''): office
* [[好事家]] (''kōzuka''): dilettante
* [[関心事]] (''kanshinji''): matter of concern and interest
* [[勝負事]] (''shōbugoto''): gambling, competition
* [[出来事]] (''dekigoto''): occurrence, affair, accident
* [[事寄す]] (''kotoyosu''): find an excuse
* [[事欠く]] (''kotokaku''): lack
* [[事誤り]] (''kotoayamari''): mistake in speaking
* [[事細か]] (''kotokomaka''): detail
* [[事足る]] (''kototaru''): suffice, be satisfied
* [[事無し]] (''kotonashi''): nothing, safe
* [[事無く]] (''kotonaku''): without accident
* [[事々物々]], [[事事物物]] (''jijibutsubutsu''): everything
* [[事々しい]], [[事事しい ]] (''kotogotoshii''): bombastic
* [[事改めて]] (''kotoaratamete''): anew
* [[事新しい]] (''kotoatarashii''): new
* [[事切れる]] (''kotokireru''): expire, die
* [[事足りる]] (''kototariru''): suffice, be satisfied
* [[事珍しく]] (''kotomezurashiku''): like something strange
* [[事立てる]] (''kotodateru''): do something different
* [[事勿れ主義]] (''kotonakareshugi''): peace-at-any-price
{{rel-bottom}}

====Phrases====
{{rel-top|phrases containing "事"}}
* [[事にしている]] (''koto ni shite iru''): make a point of
* [[事になる]] (''koto ni naru''): it has been decided that
* [[事とする]] (''koto to suru''): designate something
* [[事によると]] (''koto ni yoru to''): depending on the circumstances
* [[事が足りる]] (''koto ga tariru''): be sufficient, answer the purpose
* [[事を運ぶ]] (''koto o hakobu''): proceed, go ahead
* [[事を起こす]] (''koto o okosu''): cause trouble
* [[事を好む]] (''koto o konomu''): revel in trouble and discord
* [[事を分ける]] (''koto o wakeru''): reason with a person
* [[事を成し遂げる]] (''koto o nashitogeru''): achieve a task
{{rel-mid}}
* [[事と次第で]] (''koto to shidai de''): under certain circumstances
* [[事も無げ]] (''koto mo nage''): careless
* [[事である]] (''koto de aru''): it is said, they say
* [[事毎に]] (''kotogoto ni''): in everything
* [[明白な事]] (''meihaku na koto''): obvious fact
* [[学校の事を話す]] (''gakkō no koto o hanasu''): speak about the school
* [[考える事]] (''kangaeru koto''): what one thinks
* [[永い事]] (''nagai koto''): for a long time
* [[毎日の事]] (''mainichi no koto''): daily affairs
* [[どんな事が有っても]] (''donna koto ga atte mo''): under any circumstances
{{rel-bottom}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=사|rv=sa|mr=sa}}

# {{defn|Korean|sort=亅07}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|zh-shì.ogg|audio}}

===Noun===
{{cmn-noun|ts|pin=shì|pint=shi4|rs=亅07}}

# [[thing]]; [[matter]]

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[shì]] ([[shi4]])|wg=shih<sup>4</sup>}}

# {{defn|Mandarin|sort=亅07}}

====Compounds====
* [[事实]]
* [[事情]]

[[Category:Mandarin entries with audio links]]

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[sự]], [[xì]]|rs=亅07}}

# {{defn|Vietnamese|sort=亅07}}

[[fr:事]]
[[ko:事]]
[[id:事]]
[[it:事]]
[[lo:事]]
[[lt:事]]
[[hu:事]]
[[ms:事]]
[[ja:事]]
[[sv:事]]
[[vi:事]]