{{also|己|之|Z|㇠}}
{{character info}}
{{character info|⼄}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=5|rad=乙|as=00|sn=1|four=17710|canj=NU}}

# {{mul-kangxi radical-def}}

====Derived characters====
* [[Index:Chinese radical/乙]]
* [[亿]] [[𢒼]] [[㲸]] [[𡴭]] [[𢩧]] [[钇]] [[忆]] [[肊]] [[𣎷]] [[𥝎]] [[䎲]] [[𦨇]] [[𧈝]] [[釔]] [[鳦]] [[㐇]] [[艺]] [[𡴯]] [[朰]] [[戹]] [[穵]] [[𩁶]] [[乽]] [[𪐘]] [[𤴥]] [[𥘆]] [[氹]]

====References====
{{Han ref|kx=0083.150|dkj=00161|dj=0167.070|hdz=10047.040|uh=4E59}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etym}}

Unknown. Different ancient texts propose different origins.
* {{liushu|p}} – a developing plant (''{{w|Shuowen}}'').
* {{liushu|p}} – the intestine of a fish (''{{w|Erya}}'').
* {{liushu|p}} – the gill bone of a fish (''Liji Zhengyi'' ({{lang|zh|《禮記正義》}})
The character must not be confused with 𠃉 > 鳦.

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=yǐ
|m-s=
|c=jyut3,jyut6
|c-t=
|g=
|h=pfs=yet;gd=yad5
|j=
|mb=ĭ
|md=ék
|mn=it
|mn-t=ig4
|w=4iq
|x=
|mc=y
|oc=y
|cat=n,pn,num
}}

===Definitions===
{{zh-hanzi}}

# The second of the ten [[heavenly stem]]s ({{zh-l|天干}})
# [[second]]; [[2]]; [[B]]; [[II]]; [[beta]] ({{non-gloss definition|used for unnamed people or objects, to enumerate headings in a list, for grades, etc.}})
#: {{zh-x|路人 甲 和 路人 乙|passerby A and passerby '''B'''}}
#: {{zh-x|他 法語 成績 得 了 乙。|He got a '''B''' in French.}}
#: {{zh-x|乙肝|hepatitis '''B'''}}
# {{lb|zh|chemistry}} [[eth-]]; [[ethyl]]
#: {{zh-x|乙烷|'''eth'''ane}}
# the seventh scale degree in [[w:Gongche_notation|Gongche musical notation]] ({{zh-l|工尺譜}})
# {{lb|zh|literary|formal}} [[one]]
#: {{zh-x|（公文）……加 乙 份。|(In official letters) …added '''one''' copy.}}
# {{surname|zh}}

====Coordinate terms====
* {{list:heavenly stems/zh}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|三氯乙烷|乙醇|太乙神針|乙烷|乙覽|圖乙|左乙|小乙|太乙|三氯乙烯|乙酸|乙炔|塗乙|太乙數|勾乙|乙醚|乙等特考|乙烯|氯乙烯|某乙|甲乙|鳧乙|聚乙烯|苯乙烯|越鳧楚乙|聚苯乙烯}}

===See also===
* {{zh-l|天干}} The Heavenly Stems.
* {{zh-l|工尺譜}} The Gongche notation

{{zh-cat|Intermediate}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=c|rs=乙00}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=おつ, おち
|kanon=いつ
|kun=きのと-, おと-
}}

====Compounds====
{{der-top|Compounds}}
* {{ja-r|乙%子|おと%ご}}
* {{ja-r|乙%種|おつ%しゅ}}
* {{ja-r|乙%巡|おつ%じゅん}}
* {{ja-r|乙%女|おと%め}}
* {{ja-r|乙%姫|おと%ひめ}}
* {{ja-r|乙%夜|いつ%や}}, {{ja-r|乙%夜|おつ%や}}
{{der-bottom}}

===Etymology 1===
{{ja-kanjitab|おつ|yomi=o}}

Originally from {{der|ja|ltc|sort=おつ|-}} {{ltc-l|乙}}, arising from the proper noun sense.  Appears in texts from at least 833 CE.<ref name="KDJ">{{R:Kokugo Dai Jiten}}</ref>

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=goon|おつ|acc=1|acc_ref=DJR}}

====Proper noun====
{{wp|lang=ja}}
{{ja-pos|proper|おつ}}

# the [[second]] of the ten {{w|Celestial Stems}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|おつ}}

# something [[B]]
## the [[second]] item of any ordered [[list]]
## {{lb|ja|sort=おつ|music}} one [[tone]] lower than the [[note]] indicated by {{m|ja|甲|tr=kō||something A}}
## {{lb|ja|sort=おつ|by extension from the musical sense}} a lower, [[sonorous]] and [[moving]] [[sound]] or [[tone]]
## {{lb|ja|sort=おつ|noh|_|theatre}} in [[noh]] [[musical]] [[accompaniment]], a specific kind of [[muffled]] [[drum]] [[beat]] played by striking the [[head]] of the [[taiko]] [[drum]] and keeping the [[mallet]] pressed against the [[head]]
# {{lb|ja|sort=おつ|Kansai|_|dialect|slang}} a [[stupid]] person, someone who is [[slow]] on the [[uptake]]
# {{lb|ja|sort=おつ|rare|possibly|_|archaic}} the [[state]] or [[circumstances]] of a thing
# {{lb|ja|sort=おつ|rare|possibly|_|archaic}} [[dressing up]] in an odd fashion

===Etymology 2===
{{ja-kanjitab|おつ|yomi=o}}

By extension from the {{m|en|moving}} {{m|en|tone}} noun sense.  Appears in texts from the late {{w|Edo period}}, in the early 1800s.<ref name="KDJ">{{R:Kokugo Dai Jiten}}</ref>

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=goon|おつ|acc=0|acc_ref=DJR}}

====Adjective====
{{ja-adj|infl=na|おつ}}

# [[out of the ordinary]], [[strange]] or [[unusual]] in an [[interesting]] or [[stylish]] way
# [[strange]], [[odd]], [[weird]]
#* {{w|:ja:東海道中膝栗毛}} (''{{w|Tōkaidōchū Hizakurige}}'', “Footing It along the Tokaido Road”, or “Shank's Mare”), serial published '''1802-1814''':
#*: {{ja-usex|ヲヤ弥%次さん、'''おつ'''な手つきをしておめへ何をする|ヲヤ や%じ-さん、 '''おつ''' な てつき を して おめへ なに を する|rom=Oya Yaji-san, '''otsu''' na tetsuki o shite omē nani o suru|Oy, Yaji, what do you think you're doing with your '''weird''' way of using your hands?}}

=====Inflection=====
{{ja-na|おつ}}

===Etymology 3===
{{ja-kanjitab|yomi=o|おつ}}

Derived as aggressive clipping of {{m|ja|お疲れ様です|tr=otsukaresama desu|lit=that's honorable exhaustion (from hard work)|pos=used as a kind of greeting at work}}.  The use of {{lang|ja|乙}} for the spelling is an example of [[phonetic]] {{ja-ateji|sort=おつ}}.

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=goon|おつ}}

====Interjection====
{{ja-pos|おつ|interjection}}

# {{lb|ja|internet slang}} {{clipping of|ja|sort=おつ|お疲れ様です|tr=otsukaresama desu}}

====Derived terms====
* {{ja-r|うp%乙|うp%おつ}}, {{ja-r|うぽつ}}

===Etymology 4===
{{ja-kanjitab|きのと|yomi=k}}

Compound of {{com|ja|sort=きのと|木|tr1=Ki|t1={{w|Wood (Wu Xing)|Wood}}|pos1=one of the {{w|Wu Xing|Five Elements}}|の|tr2=no|pos2=attributive marker|弟|tr3=oto|t3=[[younger brother]]}}.

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=k|きのと|acc=2|acc_ref=DJR}}

====Proper noun====
{{ja-pos|proper|きのと}}

# the second of the ten {{w|Celestial stem|Heavenly Stems}}

===References===
<references/>

{{topics|ja|Heavenly Stems|sort=おつ}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|새|을}}

# {{rfdef|ko|sort=乙00}}

====References====
* {{Hanja ref|nav=10977}}

[[Category:CJKV radicals| ]]

----

==Middle Korean==
===Particle===
{{head|okm|particle|tr=-ol}}

# {{spelling of|okm|Idu script|ᄋᆞᆯ|pos=accusative case marker|tr=-ol}}
#* {{quote-book|oko|year=1395|author={{l|ko|[[w:고사경|高士褧]]|tr=Go Sa-gyeong}}|author1={{l|ko|金祗|tr=Kim Ji}}|title={{l|ko|[[w:대명률직해|大明律直解]]|tr=Daemyeongnyul Jikhae}}|trans-title=Correct Translation of the Great Ming Code|text=本國'''乙'''背叛|t=Betray his native country|tr=PWON.KWUK'''-ul''' POY.PAN}}

----

==Old Korean==

===Etymology 1===
From a Late Middle Chinese pronunciation of {{ltc-l|乙}}, which lenited coda {{IPAfont|/-t/}} to {{IPAfont|/-r/}}.<ref>{{w|Alexander Vovin}}, [https://www.academia.edu/33690493/Old_Korean_and_Proto_Korean_r_and_l_revisited Old Korean and Proto-Korean *r and *l revisited]</ref>

====Phonogram====
{{head|oko|phonogram|tr=*-r}}

# {{non-gloss definition|A consonantal [[phonogram]] denoting coda consonant *-r}}

=====Usage notes=====
Generally believed to have been pronounced as {{IPAfont|*-r}}, based both on internal evidence and the Chinese etymon. Old Korean {{m|oko|尸|tr=*-l}} and {{m|oko|乙|tr=*-r}} both merged unconditionally into *-l in Middle Korean, but the two phonograms were consistently distinguished in Old Korean until the late thirteenth century. Because Old Korean reconstructions are conventionally romanized using their Middle Korean reflex, the phonologically erroneous reconstruction *-l is often used as a shorthand.

===Etymology 2===

====Alternative forms====
* {{m|oko|肹|tr=*-(u)r, *-hur}}

====Particle====
{{head|oko|particle|tr=*-(u)r}}

# {{non-gloss definition|Accusative case marker}}
#* {{quote-book|oko|author={{w|Yejong of Goryeo|King Yejong of Goryeo}}|year=1120|chapter={{w2|ko|도이장가|悼二將歌|tr=Doijang-ga}}|title={{w2|ko|평산 신씨|平山申氏系譜|tr=Pyeongsan Sin-ssi Gyebo}}|trans-title=Genealogy of the Pyeongsan Sin descent group|text=主'''乙'''完乎[[白]]乎[[心音|心]]聞|t=as for the heart that admired his lord}}

=====Usage notes=====
In Middle and Modern Korean, the [[allomorph]] taken by the accusative marker after a vowel may be {{ko-inline|를|tr=-reul}} instead of {{ko-inline|ㄹ|tr=-l}}, especially in formal speech. This is the result of [[reduplication]] of the particle and is unlikely to have been present in Old Korean, although the phonologically opaque nature of the orthography makes it difficult to tell for sure.

In "Middle Old Korean", the late first-millennium stage of Korean represented by about a dozen mostly eighth-century poems, the accusative particle was consistently written with the [[phonogram]] {{m|oko|肹}}. {{m|oko|乙}} has become dominant by the twelve poems of the tenth-century monk Gyunyeo, however, and {{m|oko|肹}} is virtually not attested at all by the second millennium. There seems to be no semantic difference involved. Whether this represents a phonetic shift or simply a change in orthographic practice is unknown, although {{m|oko|肹}} and {{m|oko|乙}} had differing Middle Chinese initials.<ref>{{cite-journal|title={{lang|ko|차자표기 자료의 격조사 연구}}|trans-title=A study of case markers in Sinographic sources|journal=Gugeo gungmunhak|volume=127|year=2000|author={{lang|ko|이승재}} (Yi Seung-jae)|pages=107—132}}</ref><ref>{{cite-journal|title={{lang|ko|삼국유사와 균여전의 향찰 표기자 비교}}|trans-title=A comparison of the orthography of the ''hyangchal'' of the ''Samguk yusa'' and the ''Gyunyeo-jeon''|journal=Gugeohak|volume=51|year=2008|author={{lang|ko|황선엽}} (Hwang Seon-yeop)|pages=279—311}}</ref>

=====Descendants=====
* {{desc|okm|[[ᄋᆞᆯ]]/[[을]]|tr=-(o/u)l|pos=accusative marker}}
** {{desc|ko|을|tr=-(eu)l|pos=accusative case marker}}

===References===
<references />

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-readings|reading=[[ất]], [[át]], [[ắc]], [[ắt]], [[hắt]], [[ặc]], [[lớt]]|rs=乙00}}

# {{rfdef|vi|sort=乙00}}

====References====
* [http://nomfoundation.org/common/nom_details.php?codepoint=4e59 Nom Foundation]