{{also|𠮟|uni=auto}}
{{character info}}
{{character info|0x2F83A}}
==Translingual==

===Alternative forms===
Note that the right side component of this character (U+53F1) is written [[𠤎]] and not {{l|mul|匕}}. In Japan, as of the latest 2010 reform the correct form of the character is [[𠮟]] (U+20B9F) with [[七]] as the right side component.

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=30|rad=口|as=02|sn=5|four=64010|canj=RP|ids=⿰口𠤎}}

====References====
{{Han ref|kx=0173.020|dkj=03248|dj=0384.020|hdz=10572.060|uh=53F1}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|alt=咜}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etym}}
{{Han compound|口|七|c1=s|c2=p|t1=mouth|ls=psc}}.

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=chì
|c=cik1
|w=4tsheq
|mc=y
|oc=y
|cat=v
}}

===Definitions===
{{zh-hanzi}}

# to [[scold]]; to [[shout]] at; to [[bawl out]]

===Compounds===
{{zh-der|叱叱|叱名|叱吒|叱吒風雲|叱呵|叱喝|叱嗟|叱嗟風雲|叱石成羊|叱罵|叱責|叱退|叱馭|呵叱|呼叱|喑嗚叱吒|喑惡叱吒|大叱|怒叱|風雲叱吒}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=9|rs=口02}}

# [[scold]]
# [[shout]]
# [[reprove]]

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=しち
|kanon=しつ
|kun=しか-る
}}

====Compounds====
* {{ja-r|叱る|しかる}}: to scold
* {{ja-r|叱り飛ばす|しかりとばす}}: to scold [[away]]

===Interjection===
{{ja-pos|interjection|しっ}}

# [[shh]]
# [[shoo]]

====Usage notes====
Not included in the 2010 jōyō reform in favor of very similar [[𠮟]] (<code>U+20B9F</code>), despite 叱 having been standard in Japanese character sets.

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|꾸짖다|꾸짖을|질}}

# {{hanja form of|질|[[scold]]}}

====Compounds====
* {{ko-l|질타|[[rebuke]]|叱咤}}

----

==Old Korean==

===Pronunciation===

Conventionally reconstructed as *-s, after the Middle Korean reflexes.

===Etymology 1===

Generally thought to be from an otherwise unattested Old Chinese dialectal pronunciation of the character that began with *s-.

Minority views include that it is a graphic simplification of a different Chinese character, or that it is a ''[[gukja]]'' invented in Korea with [[𠤎]] representing the shape of the tongue while pronouncing /s/ and [[口]] being a radical that denotes a non-standard character.

====Phonogram====
{{head|oko|phonogram|tr=*-s}}

# {{non-gloss definition|A consonantal [[phonogram]] denoting coda consonant *-s}}

===Etymology 2===

====Alternative forms====

* {{m|oko|之}} {{q|logographic form, in Idu texts}}

====Particle====
{{head|oko|particle|tr=*-s}}

# {{non-gloss definition|Genitive case marker, chiefly for inanimate nouns}}

=====Descendants=====

* {{desc|okm|ㅅ|tr=s|pos=genitive case marker for inanimate or honored animate nouns}}
** {{desc|ko|ㅅ|tr=s|pos=interfix}}

====Usage notes====

In Middle Korean, the genitive case marker {{okm-inline|ㅅ|-s}} was used for both inanimate nouns and honored animate nouns, while the other genitive marker {{okm-inline|의|-uy}} was reserved for non-honored animate nouns.

In the limited Old Korean corpus, 叱 appears to be used chiefly for inanimate nouns. Meanwhile, many texts use the genitive {{m|oko|尸}} *-lq, with no evident Middle Korean reflex, for honored nouns such as the [[Buddha]]. There is a strong argument that 尸 is an allomorphic variant of 叱, representing a phenomenon ancestral to the tensing of the subsequent obstruent that occurred in Middle Korean when ㅅ occurred between a sonorant and an obstruent. If true, there was no distinction between Old and Middle Korean in the use of the genitive -s.

Unlike the other Old Korean genitive marker {{m|oko|矣|tr=*-uy}}, 叱 could follow other case markers.

====Synonyms====

* {{m|oko|矣|tr=*-uy}} {{q|genitive case marker, often for animate nouns}}
* {{m|oko|尸|tr=*-lq}} {{q|genitive case marker, chiefly for honored animate nouns; possibly an allomorph of 叱}}

====References====

* {{cite-journal|author=조은주 (Jo Eun-ju)|title=Seokdok gugyeol jaryo-e natanan sokgyeok josa-e daehayeo|script-title=ko:석독구결 자료에 나타난 속격조사에 대하여|trans-title=On the genitive case markers in interpretive ''gugyeol'' texts|journal=Gungmunhak Nonjip|year=2002|volume=18|pages=61–90}}
* {{cite-journal|author=장윤희 (Jang Yun-hui)|title=Seokdok gugyeol 'si'-ui munje haegyeor-eul wihayeo|script-title=ko:석독구결의 속격 "-시(尸)"의 문제 해결을 위하여|trans-title=For a solution to the problem of genitive 尸 in interpretive ''gugyeol''|journal=Gugyeol Yeon'gu|year=2011|volume=27|pages=117–144}}
* {{cite book|author=Nam Pung-hyun|chapter=Old Korean|pages=41–72|editor-last=Tranter|editor-first=Nicolas|title=The Languages of Japan and Korea|year=2012|publisher=Routledge|isbn=978-0-415-46287-7}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-readings|reading=[[sất]], [[sứt]], [[sớt]]|rs=口02}}

# {{rfdef|vi|sort=口02}}