{{character info/new}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Alternative forms===
* {{l|mul|⻗}} (U+2ED7) (When used as a combining radical)
* {{l|mul|㲾}}
* {{l|mul|𠕒}}
* {{l|mul|𠕘}}
* {{l|mul|𠕲}} (Based on the large seal script form of 雨)

===Etymology===
{{Han etyl}}
{{liushu|p}} – a cloud with drops of rain falling from it.

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=173|rad=雨|as=00|sn=8|four=10227|canj=MLBY}}

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=1371.180|dkj=42210|dj=1878.010|hdz=64057.010|uh=96E8|ud=38632|bh=AB42|bd=43842}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms}}

===Alternative forms===
* {{zh-l|𠕲}}

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|sit-pro|zh}} {{m|sit-pro|*k/r/s-wa}}.

===Pronunciation 1===
{{rfc-pron-n|Pronunciation 1|lang=zh}}
{{zh-pron
|m=yǔ
|c=jyu5
|h=pfs=yí
|mn=hō͘/ú
|mn_note=hō͘ - colloquial; ú - literary
|w=3hhy
|ma=y
|mc=1
|oc=1,1
|cat=n}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# [[rain]]
#* {{zh-x|雷 以 動 之，風 以 散 之，雨 以 潤 之，日 以 烜{xuǎn} 之。|Thunder serves to put things in motion; wind to scatter (the genial seeds of) them; '''rain''' to moisten them; the sun to warm them.|CL|ref=Yijing}}
# {{lb|zh|figurative}}
## {{†}} [[friend]]
## {{†}} [[teaching]], [[instruction]]

====Descendants====
{{CJKV|雨|う|우|vũ}}

===Pronunciation 2===
{{zh-pron
|m=yù
|c=jyu6
|mc=2
|oc=2,2
|cat=v
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{†}} to [[rain]]
#* {{zh-x|'''雨{yù}''' 我 公 田，遂 及 我 私。|May it '''rain''' first on our public fields, and then come to our private!|CL|ref=Shijing}}
# {{†}} to [[fall]] from the [[sky]] (like the rain)
#* {{zh-x|北 風 其 涼，'''雨{yù}''' 雪 其 雱。惠 而 好{hào} 我，攜 手 同 行。其 虛 其 邪，既 亟 只 且。|Cold blows the north wind; Thick '''fall'''s the snow. Ye who love and regard me, let us join hands and go together. Is it a time for delay? The urgency is extreme!|CL|ref=Shijing}}

===Compounds===
{{zh-der|雨雪|傾盆大雨|下雨|風雨|雨季|降雨|雲雨}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=1|rs=雨00}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=[[う]] (u)
|kanon=[[う]] (u)
|kun=[[あめ]] (ame), [[あま]] (ama), [[さめ]] (same)
}}

The {{m|ja|さめ|tr=same}} reading occurs as [[w:epenthesis|epenthesis]] (instead of the more common {{m|ja|あめ|tr=ame}}) in terms such as {{m|ja|小雨|tr=kosame||light rain, drizzle}} and {{m|ja|春雨|tr=harusame||spring rain}}.

====Compounds====
{{der-top|Compounds}}
* [[雨傘]] (''amagasa''): umbrella
* [[雨域]] (''uiki''): rainy area
* [[雨雲]] (''amagumo''): rain cloud
* [[雨蛙]] (''amagaeru''): tree frog
* [[雨笠]] (''amagasa''): rain hat
* [[雨間]] (''amaai''): break in the rain
* [[雨期]], [[雨季]] (''uki''): rainy season
* [[雨気]] (''amake'', ''uki''): signs of rain
* [[雨脚]], [[雨足]] (''amaashi'', ''ameashi''): passing shower
* [[雨具]] (''amagu''): rain gear
* [[雨空]] (''amazora''): threatening sky
* [[雨靴]] (''amagutsu''): overshoes
* [[雨戸]] (''amado''): sliding storm door
* [[雨後]] (''ugo''): after rain
* [[雨水]] (''amamizu''): rain water
* [[雨声]] (''usei''): sound of rain
* [[雨着]] (''amagi''): raincoat
* [[雨中]] (''uchū''): in the rain
{{der-mid3}}
* [[雨注]] (''uchū''): showering upon
* [[雨滴]] (''uteki''): rain drops
* [[雨天]] (''uten''): rainy weather
* [[雨曇]] (''amagumori''): overcast weather
* [[雨樋]] (''amadoi''): drainspout
* [[雨氷]] (''uhyō''): freezing rain
* [[雨風]] (''amakaze'', ''amekaze''): rain and wind
* [[雨粒]] (''amatsubu'', ''ametsubu''): raindrop
* [[雨量]] (''uryō''): rainfall
* [[雨林]] (''urin''): rain forest
* [[雨露]] (''uro'', ''ametsuyu''): rain and dew
* [[雨霰]] (''amearare''): rain and hail
* [[雨垂れ]] (''amadare''): raindrops
* [[雨降り]] (''amefuri''): in the rain
* [[雨乞い]] (''amagoi''): praying for rain
* [[雨止み]] (''amayami''): break in the rain
* [[雨宿り]] (''amadayori''): taking shelter from rain
* [[雨避け]], [[雨除け]] (''amayoke''): shelter from rain
{{der-mid3}}
* [[雨上り]] (''ameagari''): after the rain
* [[雨続き]] (''ametsuzuki''): raining for days on end
* [[雨曝し]] (''amazarashi''): weatherbeaten
* [[雨落ち]] (''amaochi'', ''ameochi''): raindrops fall from eaves
* [[雨漏り]] (''amamori''): roof leak
* [[雨合羽]] (''amagappa''): raincoat
* [[雨支度]], [[雨仕度]] (''amajitaku''): preparation for rain
* [[降雨]] (''kōu''): rainfall
* [[豪雨]] (''gōu''): heavy rain
* [[梅雨]] (''baiu'', ''tsuyu''): rainy season
* [[風雨]] (''fūu''): wind and rain
* [[大雨]] (''ōame''): heavy rain
* [[俄雨]] (''niwakaame''): shower
* [[春雨]] (''harusame''): spring rain
* [[小雨]] (''kosame''): drizzle
* [[時雨]] (''shigure''): late fall rain
* [[五月雨]] (''samidare''): early summer rain
{{der-bottom}}

===Etymology 1===
{{ja-kanjitab|あめ|yomi=k}}
Cognate with {{m|ja|雨|tr=same||rain}}. Found both alone and in compounds. Perhaps derived from {{IPAchar|/same/}} → {{IPAchar|/ame/}} with loss of the initial {{IPAchar|/s/}}; see ''same''.

====Pronunciation====
* {{IPA|[á̠.me̞]|lang=ja}}
* {{ja-accent-common|a|あ|め}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|あめ}}

# [[rain]]
#* 一雨ごとに春が来る
#*: hito ame goto ni haru ga kuru
#*:: Spring nears by each rain-fall
#* {{RQ:Wamyō Ruijushō|1|24}}
#*: 雨 設文云、雨、音禹、'''阿女'''○山田本有和名二字、谷川氏曰、'''阿女'''天水之急呼、謂如水從天下也、水從雲中而下也

===Etymology 2===
{{ja-kanjitab|さめ|yomi=k}}
Cognate with {{m|ja|雨|tr=ame||rain}}. Found in compounds. The {{IPAchar|/s/}} either represents [[w:epenthesis|epenthesis]] between two vowels in compounds or, more likely, is a reflex of an older form of the word only maintained in fossilized compounds. See the list of derived terms.

====Pronunciation====
* {{IPA|[sá̠.me̞]|lang=ja}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|さめ}}

# [[rain]]

=====Derived terms=====
{{der-top}}
* {{l|ja|秋雨}} (akisame)
* {{l|ja|速雨}}, {{l|ja|暴雨}} (hayasame)
* {{l|ja|春雨}} (harusame)
* {{l|ja|大雨}} (hichisame)
* {{l|ja|大雨}} (hijisame)
* {{l|ja|大雨}} (hisame)
* {{l|ja|氷雨}} (hisame)
* {{l|ja|糸雨}} (itosame)
* {{l|ja|霧雨}} (kirisame)
* {{l|ja|樹雨}} (kisame)
* {{l|ja|小雨}} (kosame)
* {{l|ja|群雨}}, {{l|ja|叢雨}}, {{l|ja|暴雨}} (murasame)
* {{l|ja|長雨}} (nagasame)
* {{l|ja|白雨}} (shirasame)
* {{l|ja|藪雨}} (yabusame)
* {{l|ja|横雨}} (yokosame)
* {{l|ja|夜雨}} (yosame)
{{der-bottom}}

===References===
* {{R:Wamyō Ruijushō}}

[[Category:1000 Japanese basic words|あめ]]
[[Category:ja:Weather|あめ]]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=[[우]]|eumhun=비|rv=u|mr=u|y=wu}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=雨00}}

* '''Compounds''':
** [[雨傘]] (우산, usan)
** [[雨雹]] (우박, ubak)

----

==Miyako==
{{attention|mvi}}

===Kanji===
{{head|mvi|kanji|hiragana|あみ|romaji|ami}}

===Noun===
{{head|mvi|noun|hiragana|あみ|romaji|ami}}

# [[rain]]

----

==Okinawan==

===Kanji===
{{head|ryu|kanji|hiragana|あみ|romaji|ami}}

===Noun===
{{head|ryu|noun|hiragana|あみ|romaji|ami}}

# [[rain]]

====Compounds====
{{top2}}
* [[雨小]] ([[あみぐぁー]], ''[[amigwā]]''): [[light]] [[rain]], [[drizzle]], [[mizzle]], [[sprinkle]]
* [[雨降い]] ([[あみふい]], ''[[amifui]]''): [[raining]], [[rainy]], [[rainfall]]
* [[一雨]] ([[ちゅあみ]], ''[[chuami]]''): [[rainfall]], [[shower]]
{{bottom}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[vũ]], [[thủy]]|rs=雨00}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=雨00}}

----

==Yonaguni==
{{attention|yoi}}

===Kanji===
{{head|yoi|kanji|hiragana|あみ|romaji|ami}}

===Noun===
{{head|yoi|noun|hiragana|あみ|romaji|ami}}

# [[rain]]

----

==Yoron==
{{attention|yox}}

===Kanji===
{{head|yox|kanji|hiragana|あみ|romaji|ami}}

===Noun===
{{head|yox|noun|hiragana|あみ|romaji|ami}}

# [[rain]]

====Compounds====
{{top2}}
* [[長雨]] ([[ながみ]], ''[[nagami]]''): [[rainy season]] (also [[霖]])
{{bottom}}

[[Category:CJKV radicals| ]]

[[zh-min-nan:雨]]
[[be:雨]]
[[cs:雨]]
[[de:雨]]
[[el:雨]]
[[fa:雨]]
[[fr:雨]]
[[gl:雨]]
[[ko:雨]]
[[hr:雨]]
[[it:雨]]
[[kn:雨]]
[[csb:雨]]
[[kw:雨]]
[[sw:雨]]
[[lo:雨]]
[[lt:雨]]
[[li:雨]]
[[hu:雨]]
[[mg:雨]]
[[ms:雨]]
[[fj:雨]]
[[nl:雨]]
[[ja:雨]]
[[no:雨]]
[[oc:雨]]
[[tpi:雨]]
[[pl:雨]]
[[pt:雨]]
[[ru:雨]]
[[sm:雨]]
[[sr:雨]]
[[fi:雨]]
[[sv:雨]]
[[ta:雨]]
[[th:雨]]
[[chr:雨]]
[[tr:雨]]
[[uk:雨]]
[[vi:雨]]
[[zh:雨]]