{{also|Lui}}
==Dutch==

===Pronunciation===
* {{a|NL}} {{IPA|/lœy̆/|/lʌy̆/|lang=nl}}
*: {{audio|Nl-lui.ogg|audio}}
* {{a|BE}} {{IPA|/lœy̆/|/lœː/|lang=nl}}

===Etymology 1===
From {{etyl|dum|nl}} ''[[loy]]'', ''[[leuy]]''. Cognate with the Old Norse adjective {{term|lúinn|lang=non}} “exhausted”, the Latin noun {{term|lues|luēs|lang=la|epidemy}} and the Ancient Greek verb {{term|λύω|sc=polytonic|lang=grc}} “I untie”.<ref>de Vries / de Tollenaere, "Etymologisch Woordenboek", Utrecht 1986 (14de druk), ISBN 90-274-3459-X; article ''lui 2''</ref>

====Adjective====
{{nl-adj}}

# [[lazy]]

=====Declension=====
{{nl-decl-adj}}

=====Derived terms=====
* [[luiaard]] {{m}}
* [[luierik]] {{m}} etc.
* [[luiheid]]
* [[luilak]] {{m}}
* [[luilekker]], [[luilekkerland]]
* [[luiwammes]] {{m}}
* [[liever lui dan moe]]

===Etymology 2===
Short form of {{term|luiden|lang=nl}}, a dialectal variant of  {{term|lieden|lang=nl}}.<ref>de Vries / de Tollenaere, "Etymologisch Woordenboek", Utrecht 1986 (14de druk), ISBN 90-274-3459-X; article ''lieden''</ref>

====Noun====
'''lui''' {{p}} (''has no singular; diminutive (plural): '''luitjes''''')

# An alternative form of [[lieden]] (men, persons), which got a derogatory connotation; used to mean [[people]] considered as a number of individuals (cognate with Latin [[liber]] 'free') rather than a collective group
# in compounds, '''-lui''' and '''-lieden''' are used as the plural of -[[man]]

===References===
<references/>

===Anagrams===
* [[uil#Dutch|uil]]

[[Category:Dutch nouns]]

----

==Esperanto==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/ˈlu.i/|lang=eo}}

===Verb===
{{eo-verb|lu}}

# {{transitive}} to [[rent]] (something from someone)

====Conjugation====
{{eo-conj|lu}}

----

==French==

===Etymology 1===
From {{etyl|VL.|fr}} ''illui'', which is a Vulgar Latin dative of Classical Latin {{term|ille|lang=la}} (dative ''[[illi|illī]]''). The ''-ui'' ending in Vulgar Latin ''illui'' is due to the influence of {{term|cui|lang=la}}.<ref>{{reference-book | last = Dauzat | first = Albert | coauthors = Jean Dubois, Henri Mitterand | title = Nouveau dictionnaire étymologique | year = 1964 | publisher = Librairie Larousse | location = Paris | language = French | pages = | chapter = il }}</ref>

Cognate with Italian {{term|lui|lang=it}}.

====Pronunciation====
* {{audio|Fr-lui.ogg|audio}}
* {{IPA|/lɥi/|lang=fr}}, {{X-SAMPA|/lHi/}}

====Pronoun====
{{head|fr|pronoun}}

# [[him]], [[he]]; ''the third-person masculine singular personal pronoun used after a preposition, ''or'' as the predicate of a linking verb, ''or'' when disjoined from a sentence, ''or'' as a stressed subject''.
#: ''J'habitais avec '''lui'''.
#:: ''I was living with '''him'''.
#: ''C'est '''lui''' qui a dit cela.
#:: ''It's '''he''' who said that.
#: '''''Lui''', il n'en sait rien.
#:: '''He''' doesn't know anything about it.
#* {{rfdate|lang=fr}} [[w:Alphonse Daudet|Alphonse Daudet]], “La Dernière Classe” (“The Last Class”),
#*: Je crois aussi que je n'avais jamais si bien écouté, et que '''lui''' non plus n'avait jamais mis autant de patience à ses explications.
#*:: I believe also that I had never listened so well, and that neither had '''he''' ever put so much patience into his explanations.
# Him, [[her]]; ''the third-person singular personal pronoun used as an indirect object''.
#: ''Je '''lui''' ai donné le livre.
#:: ''I gave the book to '''him/her'''.

======Related terms======
{{French personal pronouns}}

=====Derived terms=====
* [[lui-même]]

====References====
<references/>

===Etymology 2===
see the verb {{term|luire|lang=fr}}

====Verb====
{{fr-past participle|intr=1}}

# {{past participle of|luire|lang=fr}}

----

==Italian==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|[ˈlui]|lang=it}}

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|VL.|it}} ''illūi'', which is a Vulgar Latin form of ''[[illi|illī]]'' (dative singular of {{term|ille|lang=la}}). The ''ūi'' in ''illūi'' is modelled under influence of Vulgar Latin ''cūi'' (see Classical Latin {{term|cui|lang=la}}).<ref>{{reference-book | last = Patota | first = Giuseppe | title = Lineamenti di grammatica storica dell'italiano | year = 2002 | publisher = il Mulino | location = Bologna | language = Italian | id = ISBN 88-15-08638-2 | pages = p. 130 | chapter = }}</ref>

===Pronoun===
{{head|it|pronoun}}

# [[he]]
# [[him]] (''indirect form of'' '''lui''' ''used after a preposition'')

====Related terms====
* [[egli]]
* [[gli]]
* [[lei]]

===References===
<references/>

----

==Latin==

===Verb===
{{la-verb-form|luī}}

# {{conjugation of|luo|luō|1|s|perf|act|ind|lang=la}}

----

==Romanian==

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|VL.|ro}} ''illūi'', which is a form of {{etyl|la|ro}} ''[[illi|illī]]'' (dative singular of {{term|ille|lang=la}}).

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/luj/|lang=ro}}

===Pronoun===
{{head|ro|personal pronoun|genitive form of|el}}

# [[his]]
#: ''[[au|Au]] [[ceas|ceasul]] '''lui'''?''
#:: ''Do they have '''his''' watch?

====Declension====
{{ro-adj-1}}

====Synonyms====
* [[său]]

===Pronoun===
{{head|ro|personal pronoun|stressed dative form of|el}}

# to [[him]]

====Synonyms====
* [[îi]] {{italbrac|unstressed form}}

====Related terms====
* [[-lui]]

[[ast:lui]]
[[br:lui]]
[[de:lui]]
[[et:lui]]
[[el:lui]]
[[es:lui]]
[[fr:lui]]
[[gl:lui]]
[[ko:lui]]
[[hr:lui]]
[[io:lui]]
[[id:lui]]
[[it:lui]]
[[ku:lui]]
[[lt:lui]]
[[li:lui]]
[[hu:lui]]
[[mg:lui]]
[[fj:lui]]
[[nl:lui]]
[[ja:lui]]
[[no:lui]]
[[oc:lui]]
[[pl:lui]]
[[pt:lui]]
[[ro:lui]]
[[ru:lui]]
[[fi:lui]]
[[sv:lui]]
[[tl:lui]]
[[th:lui]]
[[tr:lui]]
[[vi:lui]]
[[zh:lui]]