==Translingual==
===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=84|rad=气|as=02|sn=6|four=|canj=人弓大 (ONK)|ids=⿹[[气]][[㐅]]}}

# [[air]], [[gas]], [[steam]], [[vapor]]
# [[spirit]], [[aura]], ([[spiritual]]) [[energy]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0599.041|dkj=17046|dj=0990.170|hdz=32010.031|uh=6C17|ud=27671}}

[[Category:CJKV characters simplified differently in Japan and China|氣1]]

----

==Japanese==
===Noun===
{{ja-noun|k|hira=き|rom=ki}}

# [[spirit]]; [[mood]]

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=1|rs=气02}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on={{l|ja|き}} (ki), {{l|ja|け}} (ke)|kun={{l|ja|いき}} (iki)}}

====Usage notes====
[[shinjitai|Shinjitai]]

====Synonyms====
{{l|ja|氣}}, {{l|ja|气}}, {{l|ja|炁}}

====Compounds====
{{top2}}
* {{l|ja|気化}} ({{l|ja|きか}}, ''kika'') vaporization, evaporation; gasification
* {{l|ja|気息}} ({{l|ja|きそく}}, ''kisoku'') breath, breathing
* {{l|ja|気体}} ({{l|ja|きたい}}, ''kitai'') gas
* {{l|ja|気味}} ({{l|ja|きみ/ぎみ}}, ''kimi/gimi'') a creepy feeling/sensation
* {{l|ja|蒸気}} ({{l|ja|じょうき}}, ''jōki'') Steam
* {{l|ja|帯気音}} Bands like sound
* {{l|ja|熱気}} hot air
* {{l|ja|空気}} ({{l|ja|くうき}}, ''kūki'') [[air]], [[atmosphere]]
* {{l|ja|天気}} ({{l|ja|てんき}}, ''tenki''): lit. the [[weather]]
* {{l|ja|冷気}} ({{l|ja|れいき}}, ''reiki'') cold air
{{mid2}}
* {{l|ja|雷気}}
* {{l|ja|電気}} ({{l|ja|でんき}}, ''denki''): lit. [[electricity]], electrical lights
* {{l|ja|元気}} ({{l|ja|げんき}}, ''genki''): lit. [[vigor]], [[health]], [[healthfulness]], [[good]] [[spirits]], (personal) energy, enthusiasm
* {{l|ja|気力}} ({{l|ja|きりき}}, ''kiriki''): lit. "''[[spiritual]] [[power]]/[[energy]]''"
* {{l|ja|意気}} ({{l|ja|いき}}, ''iki''): lit. [[spirit ]]
* {{l|ja|怒気}} ({{l|ja|どき}}, ''doki''): lit. "[[anger]]"
* {{l|ja|邪気}} ({{l|ja|じゃき}}, ''jaki'': lit. "''[[malice]]/[[maliciousness]]''" or a "''[[noxious]] [[gas]]''")
{{bottom}}

====Derived terms====
* {{l|ja|神気}} ({{l|ja|しんき}}, ''shinki''): lit. a "''divine [[aura]]/[[energy]]''" -- the [[presence]] of a [[god]]/[[divine]] [[spirit]].  
* {{l|ja|仙気}} ({{l|ja|せんき}}, ''senki''): lit. a "''sage's aura/energy''" -- the cultivated [[qi]] of a [[sage]].  
* {{l|ja|聖気}} ({{l|ja|せいき}}, ''seiki''): lit. a "''holy aura/holy energy''" -- the [[presence]] of a [[saint]].  
* {{l|ja|良気}} ({{l|ja|りょうき}}, ''ryōki''): lit. a "''[[good]]/[[virtuous]] [[aura]]/[[energy]]''"; the "''[[presence]] of good'';" a good [[spirit]], [[mind]] &/or [[heart]])
* {{l|ja|魔法気}} ({{l|ja|まほうき}}, ''mahōki''): lit. a "''magical aura/magical energy''" -- the [[presence]] of [[magic]]al workings.  
* {{l|ja|霊気}} ({{l|ja|れいき}}, ''reiki''): lit. a "''spiritual/spirit world aura/energy''" -- the [[presence]] of a [[spirit]] or the spirit world.  
* {{l|ja|魔気}} ({{l|ja|まき}}, ''maki''): lit. either a "''[[demonic]] aura/energy''," or a '[[mystical]] [[mind]]' -- the [[presence]] of [[magic]]al workings.  
* {{l|ja|妖気}} ({{l|ja|ようき}}, ''[[yoki|yōki]]''): lit. a "''[[supernatural]] aura/energy''" -- "''[[abilities]]''"
* {{l|ja|鬼気}} ({{l|ja|きき}}, ''kiki''): lit. a "''[[remarkable]] aura/energy''" -- the presence of [[demon]]s &/or [[dead]]/[[departed]] [[spirit]]s; something [[ghastly]]; [[bloodcurdling]]; [[unearthly]].  
* {{l|ja|悪気}} ({{l|ja|あくき}}, ''akuki''): lit. a "''[[evil]], [[foul]] aura/energy" -- the presence of evil -- "''[[offense]]''"
* {{l|ja|邪気}} ({{l|ja|じゃき}}, ''jaki'': lit. "''[[malice]]/[[maliciousness]]''" or a "''[[noxious]] [[gas]]''"), {{l|ja|邪気}} ({{l|ja|じやき}}, ''jyaki'': lit. a "''evil/foul aura/energy''"; the "''[[presence]] of evil'';" a evil spirit, mind &/or heart)
* {{l|ja|殺気}} ({{l|ja|さっき}}, ''sakki''): lit. the "''[[intent]] to [[kill]]''," a look of menace

====Derived phrases====
* {{l|ja|気がする}}
* {{l|ja|気を付けて}}
* {{l|ja|気に食わない}}, {{l|ja|気にくわない}} ({{l|ja|きにくわない}}, ''[[ki ni kuwanai]]'')
* {{l|ja|気がある}} ({{l|ja|きがある}}, ''[[ki ga aru]]'')
* {{l|ja|気になる}} ({{l|ja|きになる}}, ''[[ki ni naru]]'')
* {{l|ja|気に入る}} ({{l|ja|きにいる}}, ''[[ki ni iru]]'')
* {{l|ja|やる気}} ({{l|ja|やるき}}, ''[[yaruki]]'')

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=기|eumhun=기운|rv=gi|mr=ki|y=ki}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=气02}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[qì]] ([[qi4]])|wg=ch'i<sup>4</sup>}}

# {{defn|lang=cmn|sort=气02}}

[[fr:気]]
[[ko:気]]
[[it:気]]
[[lo:気]]
[[li:気]]
[[hu:気]]
[[ms:気]]
[[ja:気]]
[[km:気]]
[[pl:気]]
[[pt:気]]
[[fi:気]]
[[sv:気]]
[[uk:気]]
[[vi:気]]
[[zh:気]]