{{also|Ich|ICH}}
==English==

===Etymology 1===
From {{inh|en|enm|ich}}, from {{inh|en|ang|iċ||I|pos=pronoun}}, from {{inh|en|gem-pro|*ek||I|pos=pronoun}}, from {{inh|en|ine-pro|*éǵh₂||I}}. See also {{m|en|ch-}}, {{m|en|I}}.

====Alternative forms====
* {{l|en|Iche}}
* {{l|en|che}}
* {{l|en|'ch-}}
* {{l|en|ch-}}

====Pronunciation====
* {{IPA|/itʃ/|/ɪtʃ/|lang=en}}

====Pronoun====
{{head|en|pronoun}}

# {{context|personal|obsolete|lang=en}} [[I]].
#* '''1529''', John Skelton, ''Elynour Rummyng'':
#*: "Behold," she sayd, "and se How bright I am of ble! '''Ich''' am not cast away, That can my husband say, [...]"
#* '''1561''', John Awdelay, ''The fraternitye of vacabondes'':
#*: My maysters, '''ich''' am an old man, and halfe blinde, {{...}}
#* '''1568''', Thomas Howell, ''Arbor of Amitie'':
#*: With cap and knee, '''ich''' will serve thee, what should '''ich''' more declare.
#* '''1604''', William Shakespeare, ''Measure for Measure'':
#*: Kissyng and lying '''ich''' see is all one:<br/>And '''ch'''ave no mony, '''ch'''ul tell true therfore.
#* '''1645''', Thomas Davies, ''The Somersetshire Man's Complaint'':
#*: Dost thinke ''''ch'''ill labor to be poore, No no, '''ich''' haue a-doe..'''Ich''' will a plundering too.
#* '''1706''', Edward Phillips, ''The New World of English Words'':
#*: '''Ich''', a Word us'd for I in the Western Parts of England.

====Usage notes====
''Ich'' was the form of ''I'' found in the dialects of the West Country, West Midlands, and Kent. It began to disappear from written English with the onset of the {{w|Chancery Standard}} in the 15th century, yet continued to see limited use through the middle of the 19th century.

The Northern dialectal form, ''ik'' (which derives from the same Old English root), likewise disappeared from writing with the onset of the Chancery Standard in the 15th century.

====Derived terms====
* {{l|en|nich}}

===Etymology 2===
{{clipping|ichthyophthiriasis|lang=en}}.

====Pronunciation====
* {{IPA|/ɪk/|lang=en}}

====Noun====
{{en-noun|-}}

# {{context|ichthyology|lang=en}} [[ichthyophthiriasis|Ichthyophthiriasis]], a parasitic infection of freshwater fish caused by the ciliate {{taxlink|Ichthyophthirius|genus|noshow=1}}.
#* {{quote-book|1996|Edward J. Noga|Fish Disease: Diagnosis and Treatment|publisher=Iowa State University Press (2000)|pageurl=http://books.google.com/books?id=SAdDtT7YRRoC&pg=PA95&dq=ich|isbn=0-8138-2558-X|page=95
|passage='''Ich''' is one of the most common diseases of freshwater fish.}}

===Anagrams===
* {{l|en|chi}}, {{l|en|CIH}}, {{l|en|HCI}}, {{l|en|hic}}

[[Category:English three-letter words]]
[[Category:en:Alveolates]]

----

==Alemannic German==

===Alternative forms===
* {{l|gsw|i}}
* {{l|gsw|ig}} {{qualifier|Bern}}

===Etymology===
From {{der|gsw|gmh|ich}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{a|Zurich}} {{IPA|/ix/|/i/|lang=gsw}} {{qualifier|unstressed}}, {{IPA|[ɪːx]|lang=gsw}} {{qualifier|stressed}}

===Pronoun===
{{head|gsw|pronoun}}

# [[I]]

====Declension====
{{gsw-decl-personal pronouns}}

----

==Central Franconian==

===Alternative forms===
* {{l|gmw-cfr|eich}} {{i|Moselle Franconian, stressed}}
* {{l|gmw-cfr|ech}} {{i|some dialects of Ripuarian; Moselle Franconian, unstressed, enclitic}}

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|goh|gmw-cfr}} {{m|goh|ih}}. The expected form is ''ech''; the variant ''ich'' is from a form {{term||*īh|lang=goh}} with expressive lengthening (compare the corresponding diphthong in Moselle Franconian).

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/iɕ/|[iɕ]|lang=gmw-cfr}}
** {{IPA|[eɕ] → [əɕ] → [ɕ]|lang=gmw-cfr}} {{a|unstressed; enclitic before a consonant}}
** {{IPA|[ij]|lang=gmw-cfr}} {{a|enclitic before a vowel}}
* The enclitic pronunciation is used <u>after</u> verbs and conjunctions (unless the pronoun is stressed).

===Pronoun===
{{head|gmw-cfr|pronoun}}

# {{lb|gmw-cfr|some dialects of|_|Ripuarian|including|_|Kölsch}} [[I]]; {{non-gloss definition|nominative of the first-person singular personal pronoun}}
#: ''Dat senn '''ich''' op däm Fotto.''
#:: That’s '''I''' (or: '''me''') in this photo.''

----

==Crimean Gothic==

===Etymology===
From {{inh|gme-cgo|gem-pro|*ik}}, from {{inh|gme-cgo|ine-pro|*éǵh₂}}.

===Pronoun===
{{head|gme-cgo|pronoun}}

# [[I]]
#* 1562, Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq:
#*: {{l|gme-cgo||'''Ich''' malthata.}} {{l|la||Ego dico.}}

----

==German==

===Etymology===
From {{inh|de|gmh|ich}}, from {{inh|de|goh|ih}}, from {{inh|de|gem-pro|[[*ek]], [[*ik]]}}, from {{inh|de|ine-pro|*éǵh₂}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/ɪç/|lang=de}}
* {{audio|De-ich.ogg|audio|lang=de}}
* {{audio|De-at-ich.ogg|Audio (Austria)|lang=de}}

===Pronoun===
{{head|de|pronoun|cat2=personal pronouns}}

# [[I]]

====Inflection====
{{de-decl-personal pronouns}}

In contemporary German, the genitive forms of personal pronouns are restricted to formal style and are unfrequent even there. They may be used
* for the genitive object still found in a handful of verbs: ''Er erbarmte sich '''meiner''.''' – "He had mercy on me". (Colloquially one would either use the dative case, or a prepositional object, or replace the verb with another.)
* after the preposition {{term|statt|lang=de}} ("instead of, in place of"): ''Er kam statt '''meiner''' in die Mannschaft.'' – "He joined the team in my place." This sounds antiquated, and ''an meiner Statt'' or ''an meiner Stelle'' is preferable (in which case ''meiner'' is not a genitive, but a form of the possessive determiner {{m|de|mein}}).

===External links===
* {{R:Duden}}

----

==Limburgish==

===Alternative forms===
* {{l|li|iech}}
* {{l|li|ik}}

===Etymology===
From {{der|li|goh|ih}}, from {{inh|li|gem-pro|[[*ek]], [[*ik]]}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{a|most dialects}} {{IPA|[ɪx]|lang=li}}
* {{a|Maastrict}} {{IPA|[ix]|lang=li}}

===Pronoun===
{{head|li|pronoun|personal}}

# [[I]]

====Inflection====
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align: center;"
|-
!
! Singular
! Dual
! Plural
|-
! [[nominative]]
| [[ich]], {{l|li|'ch}}
| {{l|li|weet}}
| {{l|li|weer}}, {{l|li|v'r}}
|-
! [[genitive]]
| {{l|li|miener}}, {{l|li|miens}}
| {{l|li|ózzer}}
| {{l|li|ózzer}}
|-
! [[locative]]
| {{l|li|miches}}
| {{l|li|ózzes}}
| {{l|li|ózzes}}
|-
! [[dative]]<ref group=*>Dative is nowadays obsolete, use accusative instead.</ref>
| {{l|li|mir}}
| {{l|li|ós}}
| {{l|li|ós}}
|-
! [[accusative]]
| {{l|li|mich}}
| {{l|li|ós}}
| {{l|li|ós}}
|}
<references group=* />

----

==Luo==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/ɪ̀c/|lang=luo}}

===Noun===
{{head|luo|noun}}

# [[stomach]]

----

==Middle English==

===Etymology===
From {{inh|enm|ang|iċ||I|pos=pronoun}}, from {{inh|enm|gem-pro|*ek||I|pos=pronoun}}, from {{inh|enm|ine-pro|*egom||I}}, {{m|ine-pro|*éǵh₂}}.

===Pronoun===
{{head|enm|pronoun}}

# {{non-gloss definition|The Southern and sometimes Midland dialectic form of {{m|enm|I}}, in Early English, corresponding to {{m|enm|ik}} of the Northern dialect.}}

----

==Middle High German==

===Etymology===
From {{inh|gmh|goh|ih}}, from {{inh|gmh|gem-pro|[[*ek]], [[*ik]]}}.

===Pronoun===
{{head|gmh|pronoun}}

# {{context|personal|lang=gmh}} [[I]]

====Declension====
{{gmh-decl-noun|ich|{{l|gmh|wir}}|{{l|gmh|mich}}|{{l|gmh|unsich}}, {{l|gmh|uns}}|{{l|gmh|mîn}}|{{l|gmh|unser}}|{{l|gmh|mir}}|{{l|gmh|uns}}}}

====Descendants====
* German: {{l|de|ich}}

----

==Polish==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|[ix]|lang=pl}}
* {{audio|Pl-ich.ogg|Audio|lang=pl}}

===Pronoun===
{{head|pl|pronoun}}

# [[possessive pronoun]] for ''[[oni#Polish|oni]]'' or ''[[one#Polish|one]]'', namely '''[[their]]''' or '''[[theirs]]'''; [[indeclinable]].

===Pronoun===
{{head|pl|pronoun form}}

# {{inflection of|oni||gen|lang=pl}}; [[them]]
# {{inflection of|one||gen|lang=pl}}; [[them]]
# {{inflection of|oni||pr|m|acc|lang=pl}}; [[them]]

===See also===
* {{l|pl|nich}}

----

==Slovak==

===Pronoun===
{{head|sk|pronoun}}

: (The ''genitive plural'' and ''accusative plural'' of '''[[on#Slovak|on]]''' (''he''), '''[[ona#Slovak|ona]]''' (''she''), and '''[[ono#Slovak|one]]''' (''it'').)

# {{context|possessive pronoun|lang=sk}} [[their]], [[theirs]]
# [[them]]

===External links===
* {{R:SDK}}

----

==Yucatec Maya==

===Noun===
{{yua-noun}}

# {{context|anatomy|lang=yua}} [[eye]]
# [[face]]
# [[fruit]]

[[ang:ich]]
[[ar:ich]]
[[ast:ich]]
[[az:ich]]
[[bs:ich]]
[[cs:ich]]
[[da:ich]]
[[de:ich]]
[[et:ich]]
[[el:ich]]
[[es:ich]]
[[eu:ich]]
[[fo:ich]]
[[fr:ich]]
[[ko:ich]]
[[hy:ich]]
[[hsb:ich]]
[[hr:ich]]
[[io:ich]]
[[is:ich]]
[[it:ich]]
[[ka:ich]]
[[csb:ich]]
[[ku:ich]]
[[ky:ich]]
[[lo:ich]]
[[la:ich]]
[[lv:ich]]
[[lb:ich]]
[[lt:ich]]
[[li:ich]]
[[hu:ich]]
[[mg:ich]]
[[mn:ich]]
[[nah:ich]]
[[fj:ich]]
[[nl:ich]]
[[ja:ich]]
[[no:ich]]
[[oc:ich]]
[[uz:ich]]
[[pl:ich]]
[[pt:ich]]
[[ro:ich]]
[[qu:ich]]
[[ru:ich]]
[[sk:ich]]
[[sl:ich]]
[[sr:ich]]
[[fi:ich]]
[[sv:ich]]
[[ta:ich]]
[[th:ich]]
[[chr:ich]]
[[tr:ich]]
[[ur:ich]]
[[vec:ich]]
[[zh:ich]]