{{also|Appendix:Variations of "ir"}}
==Danish==
{{wikipedia|lang=da}}

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|non|da}} {{term|eir|lang=non}}.

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/ir/|[iɐ̯]|lang=da}}

===Noun===
{{da-noun|stem=irr|en|-}}

# [[verdigris]]

----

==Galician==

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|la|gl}} {{term|ire|īre|lang=la}}, present active infinitive of {{term|eo|eō|lang=la}}; the forms beginning with ''V'' from {{term|vadere|vādere|lang=la}}, present active infinitive of {{term|vado|vādō|lang=la}}.

===Verb===
{{gl-verb||ir|pres=vou|pret=fun}}

# to [[go]]
# {{conjugation of|ir||1|s|personal|inf|lang=gl}}
# {{conjugation of|ir||3|s|personal|inf|lang=gl}}

====Conjugation====
{{gl-conj (ir)}}

===See also===
* [[saír#Galician|saír]]

[[Category:Galician irregular verbs]]

----

==Interlingua==

===Verb===
{{ia-verb|irreg}}

# to [[go]]

====Conjugation====
* ''Present'': [[va]]
* ''Future'': [[ira]]
* ''Past'': [[iva]]
* ''Present participle:'' iente (?)
* ''Past participle:'' [[ite]]

====Antonyms====
* {{l|ia|venir}}

----

==Latgalian==

===Etymology===
Shortened from {{term|irā|lang=ltg}}, related to {{etyl|lv|-}} {{term|ir|lang=lv}} and {{etyl|lt|-}} {{term|yra|lang=lt}} (with the same meaning). In Latgalian, the shortened form {{term|ir|lang=ltg}} is mostly used in unstressed positions, while {{term|irā|lang=ltg}} is mostly common for stressed positions in the sentence.

===Verb===
'''ir'''

# [[is]], [[are]] (present simple 3rd-person form, singular and plural)

[[Category:Latgalian verbs]] [[Category:Latgalian verb forms]]

----

==Latvian==

===Etymology 1===
From {{etyl|bat-pro|lang=lv}} {{recons|irā}} ([[cf]]. dialectal, archaic forms {{term|irād|lang=lv}}, {{term|iraid|lang=lv}}, {{term|irāg|lang=lv}}, and also {{etyl|lt|-}} {{term|yra|yrà|lang=lt}}, which existed alongside {{recons|esti}} ([[cf]]. {{etyl|cu|-}} {{term|єстъ|tr=jestŭ|lang=cu}}, {{etyl|ru|-}} {{term|есть|tr=jest’|lang=ru}}, {{etyl|lt|-}} dialectal {{term|esti|ẽsti|lang=lt}}, {{etyl|prg|-}} {{term|ast|lang=prg}}), initially with basically existential (“there is”) meaning, but later on extending to all copular meanings, thus replacing {{recons|esti}}. In {{etyl|xsv|-}}, also the first person form {{term|irm||I am|lang=xsv}} is derived from this stem. The origin of {{etyl|bat-pro|-}} {{recons|irā|lang=bat-pro}} is, however, unclear. Various sources have been proposed: an older interjection ([[cf]]. {{etyl|lt|-}} {{term|aure|aurè|look!|lang=lt}}), the particle and conjunction {{term|ir||both... and...|lang=lv}}, a noun with the meaning “existence,” “reality,” “thing,” or even (more recently) the {{etyl|ine-pro|-}} secondary third-person verbal ending {{recons|-r}} with a later ''-ā''-extension.<ref name="LEV">Karulis, Konstantīns. 1992, 2001. ''Latviešu etimoloģijas vārdnīca.'' Rīga: AVOTS. ISBN 9984700127.</ref>

====Verb====
{{head|lv|verb form}}

# ([[he]], [[she]], [[it]]) [[is]]; {{lv-inflection of|būt|3rd|s|prs|ind|v}}
# ([[they]]) [[are]]; {{lv-inflection of|būt|3rd|p|prs|ind|v}}
# {{qualifier|with the particle {{l|lv|lai}}}} [[let]] ([[him]], [[her]], [[it]]) [[be]]; {{lv-inflection of|būt|3rd|s|imp||v}}
# {{qualifier|with the particle {{l|lv|lai}}}} [[let]] [[them]] [[be]]; {{lv-inflection of|būt|3rd|p|imp||v}}

===Etymology 2===
From {{etyl|bat-pro|lv}} {{recons|ir|lang=bat-pro}}, from the [[w:Indo-European ablaut|reduced grade]] {{recons|r̥|lang=ine-pro}} of {{etyl|ine-pro|lv}} {{recons|ar||so, then; question particle|lang=ine-pro}} (whence also {{etyl|lv|-}} {{term|ar||with|lang=lv}}, [[q.v.]]). The original meaning “and” ([[cf]]. {{etyl|lt|-}} cognate) is found in 16th- and 17th-century texts, but from the 18th century on {{term|ir|lang=lv}} was no longer used in this sense. Cognates include {{etyl|lt|-}} {{term|ir|ir̃|and|lang=lt}}, {{etyl|prg|-}} {{term|ir||also|lang=prg}}, {{term|er||(along) with|lang=prg}}, {{etyl|grc|-}} {{term|ἄρα|ἄρα, ἄρ', ῥά|so, then, therefore|tr=ára, ár', rhá|lang=grc}}.<ref name="LEV"/>

====Conjunction====
{{head|lv|conjunction}}

# {{non-gloss definition|[[additive]] [[conjunction]] [[use]]d to [[join]] [[several]] [[similar]] [[sentence]] [[element]]s, [[indicate|indicating]] their [[similar]] [[nature]]}}: [[both]] ... [[and]] ..., ... [[and]] [[also]] ..., ... [[as well as]] ...
#: ''gribējas '''ir''' smieties, '''ir''' raudāt'' — one wanted '''both''' to laugh '''and''' to cry
#: ''nāca '''ir''' jaunie, '''ir''' vecie'' — '''both''' the young '''and''' the old came
#: ''tolaik '''ir''' tēvs, '''ir''' māte bija miruši'' — at that time, '''both''' the father '''and''' the mother had died
#: ''tā bija droša, interesanta un glīta meitene, kas prata būt '''ir''' jautra, '''ir''' nopietna'' — that was a brave, fun (lit. interesting) and pretty girl, who knew how to be '''both''' cheerful '''and''' serious
#: ''nakts kā jau nakts: '''ir''' mēness spīd, '''ir''' tālē rūsa plaiksnī'' — the night is like the night (= as usual): the moon shines '''and also''' in the distance silent lightning flashes

=====Synonyms=====
* {{l/lv|kā}} ... {{l/lv|tā}} ...
* {{l/lv|gan}} ... {{l/lv|gan}} ...

====Particle====
{{head|lv|particle}}

# {{non-gloss definition|[[use]]d to [[mark]] [[connection]] and [[emphasis]], [[reinforcement]]; syn. {{term|arī|lang=lv}}}}
#: ''Ludis nolēca lielā dubļu pančkā un tur '''ir''' palika, ratiem pakaļ skatīdamies'' — Ludis jumped into a big mud puddle and there '''also''' he stayed, looking ahead at the cart
#: ''Dūdums pateica: “man vēl laika diezgan”, un pārliecināt viņu par piegādes normu nodošanu pirms termiņa tā '''ir''' neizdevās — Dūdums said: “I still have enough time,” and '''also''', '''so''' it was impossible to convince him about the rules for deliveray before the deadline
# {{non-gloss definition|[[use]]d to [[mark]] [[emphasis]], to [[reinforce]]; syn. {{term|pat|lang=lv}}}}: [[really]], [[even]]
#: ''tas viņam '''ir''' prātā nenāk'' — that doesn't '''even''' come to his mind
#: ''krūmos ir pa naktīm guļot, pilsētā viņš parādoties reti'' — '''really''' sleeping at night in the bushes, he appeared rarely in the city

=====Synonyms=====
* {{l/lv|arī}}
* {{l/lv|pat}}

===References===
<references />

[[Category:Latvian etymologies from LEV]]

----

==Lithuanian==

===Conjunction===
'''ir'''

# [[and]] (used to connect two [[homogeneous]] (similar) words, phrases, etc.); as well as; together with; in addition to
# Used at the end of a list to indicate the last item. (bread, butter and cheese)
# Used to string together sentences or sentence fragments in [[chronological]] order.

[[Category:Lithuanian conjunctions]]

----

==Old Swedish==

===Alternative forms===
* {{l|gmq-osw|i|ī}}

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|non|gmq-osw}} {{term|ír|lang=non}}, variant of {{term|ér|lang=non}}.

===Pronoun===
{{head|gmq-osw|personal pronoun|head=īr}}

# [[you]] {{gloss|plural}}

====Descendants====
* Swedish: {{l|sv|I}}, {{l|sv|ni}}

----

==Portuguese==

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|la|pt}} {{term|ire|īre|lang=la}}, present active infinitive of {{term|eo|eō|lang=la}}; the forms beginning with ''V'' from {{term|vadere|vādere|lang=la}}, present active infinitive of {{term|vado|vādō|lang=la}}.

===Verb===
{{pt-verb||ir2}}

# to [[go]]
# {{context|followed by a verb in the infinitive}} [[will]]; to be going to; {{non-gloss definition|Used as an alternative to the simple future tense}}
#: '''''Vou''' comprar um sapato.'' — “I will buy a shoe.”

====Conjugation====
{{pt-conj||ir2}}

----

==Romansch==

===Verb===
{{head|rm|verb}}

# to [[go]]

====Conjugation====

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Mood !! Tense !! 1st s. !! 2nd s. !! 3rd s. !! 1st pl. !! 2nd pl. !! 3rd pl.
|-
| Indicative || Present || jau vom || ti vas || el/ella/ins va || nus giain || vus giais || els/ellas van
|-
| Indicative || Imperfect || jau gieva || ti gievas || el/ella/ins gieva || nus gievan || vus gievas || els/ellas gievan
|-
| Indicative || Perfect || jau sun ì/ida || ti es ì/ida || el/ella/ins è ì/ida || nus essan ids/idas || vus essan ids/idas || els/ellas èn ids/idas
|-
| Indicative || Future || jau vegn a ir || ti vegns a ir || el/ellas/ins vegn a ir || nus vignin a ir || vus vegnis a ir || els/ellas vegnan a ir
|-
| Indicative || Conditional || jau giess || ti giessas || el/ella giess || nus giessan || vus giessas || els/ellas giessan
|}

----

==Scots==

===Verb===
'''ir'''

# {{context|South Scots||lang=sco}} Second-person simple present form of ti [[be]]
# {{context|South Scots||lang=sco}} Plural simple present form of ti [[be]]

===See also===
* [[im]]
* [[is]]

[[Category:Scots verbs]]

----

==Spanish==

===Etymology===
The forms beginning with ''I'' or ''Y'' from {{etyl|la|es}} {{term|ire|īre|lang=la}}, present active infinitive of {{term|eo|eō|lang=la}}; the forms beginning with ''V'' from {{term|vadere|vādere|lang=la}}, present active infinitive of {{term|vado|vādō|lang=la}}; the forms beginning with ''F'' from the corresponding forms of {{term|sum|sum|lang=la}}.

===Verb===
{{es-verb|-|ir|pres=voy|pret=fui|part=ido}}

# to [[go]]
# {{reflexive|lang=es}} to go away, to [[leave]]. See [[irse]].
# ''(with preposition [[a]] followed by an infinitive)'', to be [[going to]] (near future)
#:* ''Hoy vamos a ver una película.'' - 'Today we are going to see a movie.'

====Related terms====
* [[andar]]
* [[caminar]]
* [[ser]] (common preterite verb forms)

====Conjugation====
{{es-conj-ir (ir)}}

====See also====
* [[andar]]
* [[caminar]]
* [[marchar]]
* [[ser]] (common preterite verb forms)

[[Category:Spanish suppletive verbs]]

[[cs:ir]]
[[cy:ir]]
[[de:ir]]
[[et:ir]]
[[el:ir]]
[[es:ir]]
[[fa:ir]]
[[fr:ir]]
[[gl:ir]]
[[ko:ir]]
[[hy:ir]]
[[io:ir]]
[[id:ir]]
[[it:ir]]
[[csb:ir]]
[[la:ir]]
[[lv:ir]]
[[lt:ir]]
[[li:ir]]
[[hu:ir]]
[[mg:ir]]
[[fj:ir]]
[[nl:ir]]
[[ja:ir]]
[[no:ir]]
[[pl:ir]]
[[pt:ir]]
[[ro:ir]]
[[ru:ir]]
[[sl:ir]]
[[fi:ir]]
[[sv:ir]]
[[ta:ir]]
[[te:ir]]
[[th:ir]]
[[tr:ir]]
[[vi:ir]]
[[zh:ir]]