==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Etymology===
{{liushu|p}}: a woman with breasts with nipples kneeling or standing. In modern form turned on left side. Cognate to {{term|女||woman|sc=Hani}}, which has developed similarly, but does not include dots for nipples and has lost one breast. Compare also {{term|卵||eggs|sc=Hani}}, presumably from testicles.

{{Han etyl}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=80|rad=毋|as=01|sn=5|four=7750<sub>0</sub>|canj=田卜戈 (WYI)}}

# [[mother]]
# female elders
# female

====Derived characters====
* [[Index:Chinese radical/毋]]
* {{term|海|sc=Hani}}, [[莓]] (via [[每]]) [[苺]], [[姆]]

====Descendants====
* [[毋]]

====See also====
* [[舟]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0588.250|dkj=16723|dj=0980.320|hdz=42380.030|uh=6BCD|ud=27597|bh=A5C0|bd=42432}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=|y=mou5}}

# {{defn|lang=yue|sort=毋01}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=2|rs=毋00}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|on=[[ぼ]] (bo), [[ぼう]] (bō), [[も]] (mo)
|kun=[[はは]] (haha)
}}

====Compounds====
{{der-top|Compounds}}
* {{l|ja|父母}} ({{l|ja|ふぼ}}, ''[[fubo]]''): both [[parents]]; one's [[father]] and [[mother]]
* {{l|ja|酵母}} ({{l|ja|こうぼ}}, ''[[kōbo]]''): [[yeast]]
* {{l|ja|母語}} ({{l|ja|ぼご}}, ''[[bogo]]''): [[mother tongue]]
{{der-mid}}
* {{l|ja|教母}} ({{l|ja|きょうぼ}}, ''[[kyōbo]]''): a [[godmother]]
* {{l|ja|代母}} ({{l|ja|だいぼ}}, ''[[daibo]]''): a [[godmother]]
* {{l|ja|母ちゃん}} ({{l|ja|かあちゃん}}, ''[[kāchan]]''): [[mum]], [[mommy]]
{{bottom}}

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|kk|hira=|rom=ka-chan}}

====Usage notes====
In isolation, the character {{Jpan|母}} has 5 strokes in modern Japanese – it is not simplified. In [[shinjitai]] compound characters, such as {{Jpan|[[毎]]}} or {{Jpan|[[海]]}}, it is simplified to 4 strokes, as {{l|ja|毋}}, but this simplification is not used in isolation. In [[hyogaiji]] characters such as {{l|ja|姆}}, however, the component is not simplified.

===Etymology 1===
/haha/: *[papa] > [ɸaɸa] > [ɸawa] > [ɸaɸa] > [haha]. Medial -h [ɸ] regularly changes to [w], resulting in [ɸawa] > [hawa], the expected final form; see {{term|母|hawa}}. However, likely due to spelling influence or reduplication associations, the earlier [ɸaɸa] resurfaced around the 16th century. Initial /h-/ [ɸ] regularly becomes [h], resulting in [haha].

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=はは|rom=haha}}

# (''humble'') [[mother]]
#* {{RQ:Wamyō Ruijushō|1|116}}
#*: 母 尔雅云、母爲妣、卑履反、去聲之重、和名'''波々'''、日本紀私記云、以路波
#* {{RQ:Nippo Jisho|196}}
#*: '''Fafa'''. l, faua. ハハ. または、ハワ(母) 母.

===Etymology 2===

/iro<small>2</small>ha/. [[いろ|iro]] means "same mother" and is also seen in [[いろえ|iroe]] and [[いろせ|irose]] "siblings from the same mother". ''ha'' is likely from [[母|haha]] "mother".

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=いろは|rom=iroha}}

# mother
#* {{RQ:Wamyō Ruijushō|1|116}}
#*: 母 尔雅云、母爲妣、卑履反、去聲之重、和名波々、日本紀私記云、'''以路波'''

===Etymology 3===
====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=あも|rom=amo}}

# mother
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|20|4376}}
#*: 多妣由岐尓 由久等之良受弖 '''阿母'''志々尓 己等麻乎佐受弖 伊麻叙久夜之氣
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|20|4377}}
#*: '''阿母'''刀自母 多麻尓母賀母夜 伊多太伎弖 美都良乃奈可尓 阿敝麻可麻久母
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|20|4378}}
#*: 都久比夜波 須具波由氣等毛 '''阿母'''志々可 多麻乃須我多波 和須例西奈布母
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|20|4383}}
#*: 都乃久尓乃 宇美能奈伎佐尓 布奈餘曽比 多志埿毛等伎尓 '''阿母'''我米母我母

===Etymology 4===
====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=おも|rom=omo}}

# mother
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|20|4386}}
#*: 和加々都乃 以都母等夜奈枳 以都母々々々 '''於母'''加古比須々 奈理麻之都之母
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|20|4401}}
#*: 可良己呂武 須宗尓等里都伎 奈苦古良乎 意伎弖曽伎怒也 '''意母'''奈之尓志弖
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|20|4402}}
#*: 知波夜布留 賀美乃美佐賀尓 奴佐麻都里 伊波布伊能知波 '''意毛'''知々我多米
# a woman who breasts feeds and raises a child in place of a parent; a [[wet nurse]]
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|12|2925}}
#*: 緑児之 為社乳母者 求云 乳飲哉君之 '''於毛'''求覧

===Etymology 5===
====Alternative forms====
* {{l|ja|嚊}}
* {{l|ja|嬶}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=かか|rom=kaka}}

# a childish term for a mother; mommy, mummy
#* {{RQ:Nippo Jisho|71}}
#*: '''Caca'''. カカ (かか) Faua (母)に同じ. 母. これは子供の言葉である. また、尊敬すべき婦人、あるいは、年長で一家の主婦のような婦人の意に取られる.

===Etymology 6===
See Etymology 1 for details.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=はわ|hhira=はは|rom=hawa}}

# mother
#* {{RQ:Nippo Jisho|213}}
#*: '''Faua'''. ハワ (母) 母親.
#* {{RQ:Nippo Jisho|196}}
#*: Fafa. l, '''faua'''. ハハ. または、ハワ(母) 母.
#* {{RQ:Nippo Jisho|71}}
#*: Caca. カカ (かか) '''Faua''' (母)に同じ. 母. これは子供の言葉である. また、尊敬すべき婦人、あるいは、年長で一家の主婦のような婦人の意に取られる.
#* {{RQ:Nippo Jisho|60}}
#*: Bogui. ボギ (母儀) '''Faua''' (母)に同じ. 母.

====Usage notes====
This is used when speaking to someone else about one's own mother. There are variations that can be directed as speaking ''to'' one's mother that are more formal, respectful or distant, such as [[母上]], wherein the [[上]] means ''above''.

===Antonyms===
* {{l|ja|父}} ({{l|ja|ちち}}, ''[[chichi]]''): lit. [[father]]

===References===
* {{R:Nippo Jisho}}
* {{R:Wamyō Ruijushō}}
* {{R:Man'yōshū 3}}
* {{R:Man'yōshū 4}}

[[Category:1000 Japanese basic words|はは]]
[[Category:ja:Family|はは]]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=모|rv=mo|mr=mo|y=mo|eumhun=어미|ehrv=eomi|ehmr=ŏmi|ehy=emi}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=毋01}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[mǔ]] ([[mu3]])|wg=mu<sup>3</sup>}}

# {{defn|lang=cmn|sort=毋01}}

====Usage notes====
For the meaning of female, "母" collocates with nouns of animals but not human. E.g. 母(female) + {{l|ja|羊}} (sheep)->{{l|ja|母羊}} (ewe)

====Compounds====
* {{l|ja|母校}} ([[alma mater]])
* {{l|ja|酵母}} (xiàomǔ)
* {{l|ja|母狮子}} (mǔshīzi)

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[mẫu]], [[mẹ]]|rs=毋01}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=毋01}}

[[cs:母]]
[[de:母]]
[[et:母]]
[[fr:母]]
[[ko:母]]
[[it:母]]
[[lo:母]]
[[la:母]]
[[lt:母]]
[[li:母]]
[[hu:母]]
[[ms:母]]
[[ja:母]]
[[pl:母]]
[[pt:母]]
[[ru:母]]
[[sm:母]]
[[tr:母]]
[[uk:母]]
[[zh:母]]