<!--{{also|肆}} may be replaced by zh-forms -->
{{also|西|匹|㓁}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|strokes=5}}
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Etymology===
The original shell and bone character was [[一]] written four times, [[亖]] (compare [[二]] and [[三]]). The bronzeware style of the character featured a repositioning of those four lines inside [[口]]; this later evolved into the combination used today of 口 ''[[mouth]]'' and 八 ''[[divide]]'' which meant ''a dispersal of breath''. It could thus be said that [[four]] is a borrowed meaning for this character.
{{Han etyl}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=31|rad=囗|as=02|sn=5|four=6021<sub>0</sub>|canj=田金 (WC)|ids=⿴[[囗]][[儿]]}}

# [[four]]

====Usage notes====
{{wikipedia|Numbers in Chinese culture#Four|Numbers in Chinese culture}}
As superstition, 四 is avoided because similar to {{term|死||death|sc=Hani}} in sound.

====See also====
* [[西]] [[匹]] [[㓁]]
{{Chinese-numbers}}
* {{qualifier|Chinese financial form}}: [[肆]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0216.220|dkj=04682|dj=0439.210|hdz=10710.160|uh=56DB|ud=22235|bh=A57C|bd=42364}}

[[Category:Chinese digits]]
[[Category:Chinese numbers]]
[[Category:Chinese numerals]]

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=[[sei3]], [[si3]]|y=sei3, si3}}

# {{defn|lang=yue|sort=囗02}}

----

==Hakka==

===Hanzi===
{{hak-hanzi|poj=sì|gd=si<sup>5</sup> [Meixian]|hpy=xi4}}

# {{defn|lang=hak|sort=囗02}}

====References====
*[http://www.chinalanguage.com/dictionaries/?mode=view&view=chardict&query=%E5%9B%9B CCDICT (Chineselanguage.org)]
*[http://minhakka.ling.sinica.edu.tw/bkg/hakyin/search.php?DETAIL=1&LIMIT=id=38149&dbname=su_tian_1&graph=2 Academia Sinica - Hakka-English Dictionary]
*Lau, Chun-fat. ''Hakka Pinyin Dictionary'' (Chinese). [[Hong Kong]]: [[w:Chinese University of Hong Kong|The Chinese University Press]], 1997 <small>(Chinese IME supplement)</small> ISBN 962-201-750-9.

----

==Japanese==
{{cardinalbox|ja|3|4|5|三|五}}

===Etymology 1===
/yo<small>2</small>/ *[jə] > /yo/ [jo].

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=よ|rom=yo}}

# [[four]]

===Etymology 2===
Native {{term|四|yo|id}} + ''n'', influenced by analogy by the final sound in Chinese {{term|三|san|three}}.

====Pronunciation====
* {{audio|Ja-4-yon.ogg|Audio|lang=ja}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=よん|rom=yon}}

# [[four]]
# [[fourth]]

===Etymology 3===
Sino-Japanese reading.

====Pronunciation====
* {{audio|Ja-4-shi.ogg|Audio|lang=ja}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|k|hira=し|rom=shi}}

# [[four]]
# [[fourth]]

===Etymology 4===

====Number====
'''四''' ([[よん]], ''yon'')

# [[four]], [[4]]

===Etymology 5===
From {{term|亖||four}}. The parallel lines have since evolved into an approximation of what a fist looks when viewed palm side down.

====Kanji====
{{ja-kanji|grade=1|rs=口02}}

=====Readings=====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[し]] (''shi'')|kun=[[よ]] (''yo''), [[よつ]] (''yotsu''), [[よっつ]] (''yottsu''), [[よん]] (''yon'')|nanori=[[あ]] (''a''), [[つ]] (''tsu''), [[よつ]] (''yotsu'')}}

=====Compounds=====
* [[四季]] (しき, ''shiki''): four seasons
* [[四股]] (しこ, ''shiko''): [[sumo]] [[wrestler]] ceremonial leg raising and stomping
* [[四大]] (しだい, ''shidai''): the four [[elements]] ([[Buddhism]])
* [[四月]] (しがつ, ''shigatsu''): April
* [[四半]] ([[しはん]], ''[[shihan]]'') a [[quarter]]

=====Derived terms=====
* [[四捨五入]] (''shishagonyuu''): rounding up (fractions)
* [[四則計算]] (''shizokuenzan''): the four basic [[arithmetic]] [[operations]]
* [[四天王]] (''shitennou''): the [[w:Four Heavenly Kings|Four Heavenly Kings]] ([[Buddhism]])
* [[四面楚歌]] (''shimenzoka''): facing hostility, difficulty, or frustration on all sides

===References===
* The Japan Times (March 17, 2010). ''[http://www.kanjiclinic.com/kc102final.htm You can count on the tales behind number-kanji].'' Accessed March 23, 2010.

[[Category:Japanese numbers|4]]
[[Category:Japanese numerals|4]]
[[Category:Japanese terms written with one Han script character]]
[[Category:Japanese terms spelled with 四]]
[[Category:1000 Japanese basic words|よん]]
----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=사|rv=sa|mr=sa|y=sa|eumhun=넉|ehrv=neok|ehmr=nŏk|ehy=nek}}

# [[four]]

====Compounds====
* [[四角]]
* [[四捨五入]]
* [[四季]]
* [[四肢]]
* [[四天王]]
* [[四時]]
* [[再三再四]]
* [[四方]]
* [[正四角形]]
* [[正四面體]]
* [[正四品]]

[[Category:Korean numbers|4]]

----

==Mandarin==

===Etymology===

From [[Old Chinese]] ''*slyiy'', affected by *s- of preceding *sum "3" ([[三]]), from [[Proto-Sino-Tibetan]] ''*p-lëy'' "four" (compare Classical Tibetan ''bzhi'')

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|zh-sì.ogg|audio|lang=cmn}}

===Numeral===
{{cmn-car-num|ts|pin=sì|pint=si4}}

# [[four]]

===Noun===
{{cmn-noun|ts|pin=sì|pint=si4}}

# (''musical note'') [[la]]

===See also===
* [[工尺]]

===Derived terms===
* [[四…八…]]
* [[四壁]]
* [[四边]], [[四边儿]]
* [[四边形]]
* [[四不像]]
* [[四部]]
* [[四重奏]]
* [[四出]]
* [[四处]]
* [[四大皆空]]
* [[四方]]
* [[四顾]]
* [[四海]]
* [[四合房]]
* [[四合院]]
* [[四呼]]
* [[四季]]
* [[四角号码]]
* [[四脚蛇]]
* [[四邻]]
* [[四面八方]]
* [[四面楚歌]]
* [[四拇指]]
* [[四声]]
* [[四时]]
* [[四体]]
* [[四外]]
* [[四围]]
* [[四维空间]]
* [[四仙桌]]
* [[四则]]
* [[四肢]]
* [[四周]]
* [[四周围]]

[[Category:Mandarin entries with audio links]]
[[Category:Mandarin numbers|si4]]
[[Category:Mandarin numbers|囗02四]]
[[Category:cmn:Cardinal numbers]]

----

==Min Nan==

===Hanzi===
{{nan-noun|t|poj=[[sù]] (su<sup>3</sup>), [[sì]] (si<sup>3</sup>)|pojt=su3, si3|rs=囗02}}

# {{defn|lang=nan}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[tứ]], [[tớ]], [[tư]]|rs=囗02}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=囗02}}

----

==Wu==
{{attention|wuu}}

===Pronunciation===
{{attention|wuu}}

Latin Alphabet: szˋ

Zhuyin Fuhao: ㄙˋ

[[zh-min-nan:四]]
[[cs:四]]
[[cy:四]]
[[da:四]]
[[de:四]]
[[el:四]]
[[es:四]]
[[eo:四]]
[[fr:四]]
[[ko:四]]
[[hr:四]]
[[io:四]]
[[id:四]]
[[it:四]]
[[lo:四]]
[[la:四]]
[[lt:四]]
[[li:四]]
[[hu:四]]
[[mg:四]]
[[ms:四]]
[[ja:四]]
[[no:四]]
[[nn:四]]
[[uz:四]]
[[pl:四]]
[[pt:四]]
[[ru:四]]
[[fi:四]]
[[sv:四]]
[[ta:四]]
[[chr:四]]
[[uk:四]]
[[zh:四]]