==Translingual==

===Etymology===
{{Han compound|人|尃|c1=s|c2=p|t1=man|ls=psc}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=9|rad=人|as=10|sn=12|four=2324<sub>2</sub>|canj=人戈月戈 (OIBI)}}

# tutor, teacher
# assist
# surname

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0112.190|dkj=00939|dj=0240.050|hdz=10201.050|uh=5085|ud=20613|bh=B3C5|bd=46021}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=|y=fu6}}

# {{defn|Cantonese|sort=人10}}
Chinese Version:

《史记殷本纪》指出：“武丁夜梦得圣人，名曰说，以梦所
见，视群臣百吏，皆非也。于是乃使百工营求之野，得说于
傅险中，是时说为胥靡，筑于傅险，见于武丁，武丁曰：‘
是也。’得而与之语，果圣人，举以为相，殷国大治。故遂
以傅险姓之，号曰傅说。”由此可见，这位上古贤相是被帝
王赐姓名为“傅说”，至于他以前的姓名为何，可能由于他
为相之后的声名太响亮了，所以没有人去注意，结果，史书
上缺乏记载，而后世也就不得而知了。

傅说之为傅姓的始祖，是被历来的学者所共同承认的，
从未有人表示过置疑，傅姓人家最早的发源地就是在山西省
平陆县之东，今名为“隐贤社”。

另外，根据《姓纂》的记载，傅姓后来主要是繁衍于北
地和清河二处；北地，指的是今宁夏省及甘肃省的东北部地
区；清河，指的则是今河北省的清河、枣强以及山东省的济
平、高唐、临清、武城等县及其附近一带之地，可见得傅姓
在北方的繁衍，是既速且广的。

汉晋之时名人辈出具有光耀史册的始祖的傅氏，在历史
上，一直是表现优异，丝毫都没有辱没自己与生俱来的光彩
门楣，尤其汉晋之时。傅氏更是名人能士辈出，大放异彩。
傅姓在汉晋，数百年间的大放异彩，是由2200年前的北
地人傅宽开始的，傅宽是汉高祖的开国功臣，汉高祖得天下
后曾定元功18人，傅宽被排在第9位，封为阳陵侯，显赫
异常。


English Version:

There is an archived story in the records of “History Speaks – Yin Dynasty History”. King Wu Ding (武丁) has a dream that he will receive a wise sage for his kingdom. After waking up the next day, he gathers all his officers and tries to find the wise man from his dream but they could not find anyone who looks like him. He orders his servants to go and search for the sage. Finally, they found him in a place called Fu Xian (傅险). His name is Yuè (说) and and was serving hard labor. The king meets Yuè and finds that he is the exact same person from his dream. He is overjoyed and upon conversing with Yuè, he is amazed by his incredible knowledge and wisdom in matters of the state. King Wu Ding had no doubt that he was the sage that he was looking for and makes him his prime minister. Since he had met Yuè at Fu Xian, the king bestows upon him and his descendants the surname "Fu" (傅) and he was “Fu Yuè” (傅说) from then on.

Fu Yuè was a legendary prime minister and Fu has been a prominent last name ever since. Historians agree that the surname Fu began with Fu Yuè and originated from today’s eastern part of Ping Lu County in Shanxi Province at a place called “Yin Xian She” (Means hidden sage place).

According to the ancient “Xing Zhuan” (Book of Surnames), Fu families were established mainly in the northern provinces of Ningxia, Gansu, Hebei and Shandong. Thus, historians believe that Fu families are found mainly in Northern China and spread out from there.

Fu is a distinguished last name in history. During the Han Dynasty, Fu Kuan (傅宽) is one of the eighteen generals who played a key role in establishing the Han Dynasty.

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=|rs=人10}}

# {{defn|Japanese|sort=人10}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[ふ]] (fu)|kun=[[もり]] (mori), [[つく]] (tsuku), [[かしずく]] (kashizuku)}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=부|rv=bu|mr=pu}}

# {{defn|Korean|sort=人10}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[fù]] ([[fu4]])|wg=fu<sup>4</sup>}}

# {{defn|Mandarin|sort=人10}}

----

==Min Nan==

===Hanzi===
{{nan-hanzi|poj=pò͘, hū, hù}}

# {{defn|Min Nan}}

====Descendants====
* {{context|Hokkien dialect}} Filipino: {{l|fil|Po}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[phó]]|rs=人10}}

# {{defn|Vietnamese|sort=人10}}

[[fr:傅]]
[[ko:傅]]
[[mg:傅]]
[[ja:傅]]
[[pl:傅]]
[[vi:傅]]
[[zh:傅]]