{{also|冢}}
{{character info}}
{{character info|0xfa10}}
==Translingual==
{{ja-forms|塚|冢|塚}}

===Alternative forms===
* There are two Unicode z-variants, at code points U+585A and U+FA10. The latter form (U+FA10) has the next to last stroke of {{l|mul|豖}} connected to the top horizontal stroke (similar to {{l|mul|衣}}).
* The Japanese form of the character is written with {{l|mul|豕}} instead of {{l|mul|豖}} as its bottom right component. However both {{lang|ja|塚}} (Japanese) and {{lang|und|sc=Hant|塚}} (traditional Chinese) forms are encoded under the same codepoint.

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=32|rad=土|as=10|asj=09|sn=13|snj=12|four=47132|canj=GBMO|ids=⿰土冢(GHTK),⿰土⿱冖豕(J)}}

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0236.020|dkj=05345|dj=0473.180|hdz=10476.070|uh=585A|ud=22618|bh=B6EF|bd=46831}}
* {{Han ref|uh=FA10}}

===Usage notes===
The [[Kangxi]] dictionary lists 塚 as the [[unorthodox]] form ([[俗字]]) of [[冢]]. However, the usage of 塚 persists in Japan with one stroke removed. In traditional and simplified Chinese [[冢]] is the [[orthodox]] form ([[正字]]) of the character. As a variant character, 塚 is used in mainland China.

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=冢|t2=冢}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etym}}
{{Han compound|土|t1=earth|冢|ls=psc|c1=s|c2=p}} – an earthen mound, a tomb of earth.

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=zhǒng
|m-s=
|c=cung2
|c-t=
|g=
|h=pfs=chhúng;gd=cung3
|j=
|mb=dě̤ng
|md=tūng
|mn=thióng
|mn-t=tong2
|w=
|x=
|mc=y
|oc=y
|cat=n
}}


===Definitions===
{{head|zh|hanzi}}

# [[tomb]]; [[burial]] [[mound]]

====Synonyms====
{{zh-dial|墳}}

===Compounds===
{{zh-der|塚仔埔|塚山|塚埔|亂塚|孤墳野塚|墳塚|疑塚|衣冠塚|墨池筆塚|義塚|荒塚|貝塚|塚中枯骨|垌塚}}

----

==Japanese==
{{ja-kanji forms|k=y}}

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|rs=土10}}

# [[mound]], [[hillock]], [[tumulus]] {{qualifier|implies a manmade origin}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=ちゅう
|kanon=ちょう
|kun=つか-
}}

===Etymology===
<div style="float:right;">
{{wikipedia|lang=ja}}
{{wikipedia|Mound}}
</div>
{{ja-kanjitab|つか|yomi=k}}
Cognate with {{cog|ojp|-|sort=つか}} verb {{m|ja|築く|tr=tsuku||to build up using earth and/or stone}}.<ref name="KDJ">{{R:Kokugo Dai Jiten}}</ref>

The {{IPAchar|/a/}} ending may indicate that ''tsuka'' developed as the [[nominalization]] of the {{m|ja|未然形|tr=mizenkei||[[irrealis]] form}} of the verb, suggesting an original meaning of "that which is being built up into an [[earthworks]] (but isn't finished yet)". The irrealis is also the root form for constructing the passive form of all Japanese verbs, so the original meaning might instead have been just the passive sense of "that which is built up into an earthworks".

===Pronunciation===
{{ja-pron|yomi=k|つか|acc=2|dev=1|acc_ref=DJR,NHK}}

===Alternative forms===
* {{ja-l|冢}}

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|つか}}

# a [[mound]] or [[hillock]], generally [[manmade]]
# a [[grave]], a [[tumulus]] or [[burial mound]]

====Derived terms====
{{der-top}}
* {{ja-r|蟻%塚|あり%づか|rom=-}}, {{ja-r|垤|ありづか}}: [[anthill]]
* {{ja-r|一%里%塚|いち%り%づか}}: a [[milestone]]
* {{ja-r|鶯%塚|^うぐいす%づか}}: the [[kabuki]] [[play]], ''Mukashigatari Uguisuzuka''
* {{ja-r|鰻%塚|うなぎ%づか}}
* {{ja-r|貝%塚|かい%づか}}: a [[shell]] [[mound]] or [[midden]]
* {{ja-r|狐%塚|きつね%づか}}: [[foxhole]]
{{der-bottom}}

====Synonyms====
* {{sense|grave, small burial mound}} {{ja-r|墓|はか}}
* {{sense|tumulus, large burial mound}} {{ja-r|古墳|こふん}}

===References===
<references/>

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=총|rv=chong|mr=ch'ong}}

# [[cemetery]]
# [[tomb]], burial mound

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[trủng]]|rs=土0}}

# {{rfdef|vi|sort=土0}}