{{also|夫|禾|末|天|未|夭|兂}}
==Translingual==

===Etymology===
{{Han etyl}}
{{liushu|ic|rs=大}}
A man [[大]] with an hairpin [[一]] in his hair. In ancient times, when men reached the age of 20, they bound their hair with a hairpin during the [[w:Guan Li|Guan Li ceremony]]. The hairpin is the sign of “a grownup man”.

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=37|rad=大|as=01|sn=4|four=50030|canj=QO}}

# [[man]], [[male]] [[adult]], [[husband]]
# [[he]], [[she]], [[they]], [[those]], [[this]], [[that]]

===See also===
* [[替]] [[賛]] {{qualifier|top simplified from 竝 and 兟}}

===References===
* {{Han ref|kx=0248.110|dkj=05835|dj=0507.010|hdz=10521.010|uh=592B|ud=22827|bh=A4D2|bd=42194}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms}}

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=fū,fú
|c=fu1,fu4
|mn=hu
|mc=y
|oc=y
|cat=n,pron,det
}}

====Noun====
{{zh-noun|ts}}
# [[husband]]
#: [[丈夫]] husband, [[夫妇]] married couple
# {{senseid|cmn|man}}[[man]], [[male]] [[adult]]
# [[manual]] [[worker]]
#: [[农夫]] peasant, [[渔夫]] fisherman

====Pronoun====
{{zh-pronoun|ts}}
# (classical) he, she, they, those, this, that

====Particle====
{{zh-particle|ts}}
# {{senseid|cmn|is it not}} {{context|literary|lang=cmn|sort=fu2}} sentence-final, meaning "Is it not?" or "Isn't it?"
# {{senseid|cmn|topic marker}} {{context|literary|lang=cmn|sort=fu2}} initial particle which introduces a topic
#* '''Spring and Autumn Period or Warring States Period''', [[孙武]] (Sun Wu), ''孫子 (The Art of War)'':
#*: '''夫'''将者，国之辅也。辅周则国必强，辅隙则国必弱。
#*:: The general is the country's defense. If the defense is solid, the country can only be strong; if it has gaps, then the country can only be weak.

=====Usage notes=====
Not used as an independent character in modern Chinese. Only found in compounds.

=====Compounds=====
{{der-top}}
* [[夫人]] madam
* [[大夫]] doctor
* [[丈夫]] husband
* [[夫妇]] married couple
* [[功夫]] kung-fu
* [[农夫]] peasant
* [[渔夫]] fisherman
{{der-bottom}}

====References====
* {{quote-book|1995|Edwin G. Pulleyblank|Outline of Classical Chinese Grammar|page=17}}
* {{quote-book|1995|Edwin G. Pulleyblank|Outline of Classical Chinese Grammar|page=74}}
* {{cite web
|url=http://www.mdbg.net/chindict/chindict.php?page=worddict&wdrst=0&wdqb=夫
|title=夫
|work=MDBG English to Chinese dictionary ( Based on CC-CEDICT )
|language=Mandarin/English
|accessdate=2014-02-17}}
* (''Min Nan'') [http://twblg.dict.edu.tw/holodict_new/result_detail.jsp?n_no=795&curpage=1&sample=%E5%A4%AB&radiobutton=1&querytarget=1&limit=20&pagenum=1&rowcount=12 Taiwan Min Nan Common Words Dictionary (臺灣閩南語常用詞辭典)]

----

==Japanese==

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|おっと}}

# {{cx|humble|lang=ja|sort=おっと}} (one's own) [[husband]]

{{ja-noun|つま}}

# [[spouse]], [[consort]]

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=4|rs=大01}}

# {{defn|lang=ja|sort=大01}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[ふ]] (''fu''), [[ふう]] (''fū''), [[ぶ]] (''bu'') [[ぷ]](''pu'')|kun=[[おっと]] (''otto''), [[それ]] ([[夫れ]], ''sore'')|nanori=[[お]] (''o''), [[と]] (''to''), [[ゆう]] (''yū''), [[よ]] (''yo'')}}

====Compounds====
{{der-top}}
{{top2}}
* [[夫妻]] (fusai)
* [[夫人]] (fujin)
* [[夫婦]] (fūfu)
* [[夫れ夫れ]] (sorezore)
* [[煙突掃除夫]] (entotsu soujifu)
* [[義太夫]] (gidayū)
* [[水夫]]
* [[寡夫]] (kafu)
* [[工夫]] (kufū, kōfu)
{{mid2}}
* [[丈夫]] (jōbu, masurao)
* [[前夫]] (zenpu)
* [[大夫]] (taifu, daibu, tayū)
* [[大丈夫]] (daijōbu)
* [[人夫]] (ninpu)
* [[農夫]] (nōfu)
* [[匹夫]] (hippu)
* [[武夫]] (bufu)
* [[亡夫]] (bōfu)
* [[老夫婦]] (rōfūfu)
* [[憲夫]] (のりお, Norio)
* [[郁夫]] (いくお, Ikuo; ふみお, Fumio)
* [[多喜夫]] (たきお, Takio)
{{bottom}}
{{der-bottom}}

[[Category:1000 Japanese basic words|おつと]]
[[Category:ja:Family|おつと]]
[[Category:Japanese terms written with one Han script character]]
[[Category:Japanese terms spelled with 夫]]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=부|rv=bu|mr=pu}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=大01}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[phu]]|rs=大01}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=大01}}

[[fr:夫]]
[[ko:夫]]
[[kn:夫]]
[[sw:夫]]
[[la:夫]]
[[lt:夫]]
[[li:夫]]
[[hu:夫]]
[[mg:夫]]
[[ms:夫]]
[[ja:夫]]
[[no:夫]]
[[pl:夫]]
[[ro:夫]]
[[ru:夫]]
[[sv:夫]]
[[th:夫]]
[[chr:夫]]
[[uk:夫]]
[[vi:夫]]
[[zh:夫]]