{{also|日|曰|臼|自|百}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}
{{stroke order|strokes=5}}

===Etymology===
{{liushu|p}} – originally an ''[[acorn]]''. The character acquired its current meaning of ''[[white]]'' from the color of the acorn’s flesh. The original meaning has been lost. (Compare [[自]] – originally “nose”, now “self”.)

{{Han etyl}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=106|rad=白|as=00|sn=5|four=2600<sub>0</sub>|canj=竹日 (HA)}}

# [[white]]
# [[pure]], [[unblemished]]
# [[bright]]
# used as a [[surname]]

====Derived characters====
* [[Index:Chinese radical/白]]
* [[柏]]
* [[習]] {{qualifier|in current form}}

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0785.010|dkj=22678|dj=1196.010|hdz=42642.010|uh=767D|ud=30333|bh=A5D5|bd=42453}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/paːk˨/|lang=yue}}

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=baak6|y=baak6}}

# {{defn|lang=yue|sort=白00}}

----

==Hakka==

===Hanzi===
{{hak-hanzi|poj=pha̍k|gd=p'ak<sup>8</sup>|hpy=pag6, ped6}}

# {{defn|lang=hak|sort=白00}}

====References====
* [http://www.chinalanguage.com/dictionaries/?mode=view&view=chardict&query=%E7%99%BD CCDICT (Chineselanguage.org)]
* [http://minhakka.ling.sinica.edu.tw/bkg/hakyin/search.php?DETAIL=1&LIMIT=id=30113&dbname=su_tian_1&graph=2 Academia Sinica - Hakka-English Dictionary]
* Lau, Chun-fat. ''Hakka Pinyin Dictionary'' (Chinese). [[Hong Kong]]: [[w:Chinese University of Hong Kong|The Chinese University Press]], 1997 <small>(Chinese IME supplement)</small> ISBN 962-201-750-9.

----

==Japanese==

===Pronunciation===
* {{sense|しろ}} {{IPA|/ɕi.ꜜɾo/|lang=ja}}

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=1}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|kanon=[[はく]] (haku)|goon=[[びゃく]] (byaku)|kun=[[しろ]] (shiro), [[しろい]] (shiroi), [[もうす]] (mousu)}}

====Compounds====
* [[白銀]]
* [[白夜]]
* [[白蟻]]
* [[白雨]]
* [[潔白]]
* [[面白い]] (おもしろい, omoshiroi)
* [[漂白剤]] (hyōhakuzai)
* [[腕白]] ([[わんびゃく]], ''[[wanbyaku]]''): [[naughty]]
* [[白書]]  ([[はくしょ]] , ''[[hakusho]]''): [[White Paper]]

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|k|hira=しろ|rom=shiro}}

# [[white]]
# a white [[go]] stone
# [[innocence]]

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|k|hira=しら|rom=shira}}

# [[white]], Old Japanese pronunciation, now only seen in compounds

====Derived terms====
* {{l|ja|白髪|tr=しらが, shiraga}}: white hair
* {{l|ja|白鳥|tr=しらとり, shiratori}}: swan
* {{l|ja|白羽|tr=しらは, shiraha}}: white feather
* {{l|ja|白地|tr=しらじ, shiraji}}: white background
* {{l|ja|白樺|tr=しらかば, shirakaba}}: Japanese white birch
* {{l|ja|白木|tr=しらき, shiraki}}: plain wood, unfinished woodwork
* {{l|ja|白雪|tr=しらゆき, shirayuki}}: white snow
* {{l|ja|白旗|tr=しらはた, shirahata}}: white flag
* {{l|ja|白浜|tr=しらはま, shirahama}}: white sandy beach
* {{l|ja|白壁|tr=しらかべ, shirakabe}}: white plaster wall
* {{l|ja|白子|tr=しらこ, shirako}}: soft roe, milt
* {{l|ja|白百合|tr=しらゆり, shirayuri}}: white lily
* {{l|ja|白糸|tr=しらいと, shiraito}}: white thread
* {{l|ja|白菊|tr=しらぎく, shiragiku}}: white chrysanthemum
* {{l|ja|白鷺|tr=しらさぎ, shirasagi}}: generic name for herons with all-white plumage (inc. egrets)
* {{l|ja|白州,白洲, 白沙|tr=しらす, shirasu}}: bar of white sand
* {{l|ja|白梅|tr=しらうめ, shiraume}}: white plum blossoms;  white Japanese apricot;  white-blossomed plum
* {{l|ja|白む|tr=しらむ, to grow light;  to become white;  to turn grey (gray)}}:
* {{l|ja|白雲|tr=しらくも, shirakumo}}: white clouds
* {{l|ja|白玉|tr=しらたま, shiratama}}: white gem (e.g. pearl)
* {{l|ja|白玉椿|tr=しらたまつばき, shiratamatsubaki}}: common camelia
* {{l|ja|白ける|tr=しらける, shirakeru}}:
* {{l|ja|白子干し|tr=しらすぼし, shirasuboshi}}: dried young sardines
* {{l|ja|白刃|tr=しらは, shiraha}}: drawn sword, naked sword
* {{l|ja|白滝|tr=しらたき, shirataki}}: sheet-like waterfall
* {{l|ja|白茶ける|tr=しらちゃける, shirachakeru}}: to fade,  to discolor
* {{l|ja|白々しい|tr=しらじらしい, shirajirashii}}: pure-white, very clear
* {{l|ja|白魚|tr=しらうお, shirauo}}: icefish
* {{l|ja|白帆|tr=しらほ, shiraho}}: white sail
* {{l|ja|白露|tr=しらつゆ, shiratsuyu}}: glistening dew
* {{l|ja|白砂|tr=しらすな, shirasuna}}: white sand
* {{l|ja|白太|tr=しらた, shirata}}: sapwood
* {{l|ja|白癩|tr=しらはたけ, shirahatake}}: vitiligo
* {{l|ja|白絹|tr=しらぎぬ, shiraginu}}: white silk

===Related terms===
* [[白い]](しろい, ''shiroi'') (Adjective form)
* [[しらを切る]](しらをきる, ''shirawokiru'')

[[Category:1000 Japanese basic words|しろ]]
[[Category:ja:Colors|しろ]]
[[Category:Japanese terms written with one Han script character]]
[[Category:Japanese terms spelled with 白]]
----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=백|rv=baek|mr=paek|y=payk|eumhun=희다|ehrv=huida|ehmr=hŭida|ehy=huyta}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=白00}}

===See also===
* [[擘]]

----

==Mandarin==
{{zh-hanzi-box|白}}

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|zh-bái.ogg|audio|lang=cmn}}
* {{IPA|[ pai˧˥ ]|lang=cmn}}
* {{IPA|[ pɔ˧˥ ]|lang=cmn}}

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[bái]] ([[bai2]]), [[bó]] ([[bo2]])|wg=pai<sup>2</sup>, po<sup>2</sup>}}

===Adjective===
{{cmn-adj|ts|pin=bái|pint=bai2}}

# {{context|Beginning Mandarin|lang=cmn}} [[white]]
# {{context|Beginning Mandarin|lang=cmn}} [[clear]]; [[pure]]; [[plain]]; [[blank]]

===Adverb===
{{cmn-adv|ts|pin=bái|pint=bai2}}

# {{context|Elementary Mandarin|lang=cmn}} [[in vain]]

====Usage notes====
* The ''bó'' reading is almost never used in spoken Mandarin.  The most well-known usage of ''bó'' is in the name of a leading Tang dynasty poet [[w:Li Bo|Lǐ Bó]] (李白) (now commonly pronounced ''Lǐ Bái''); this reading is decreasingly common in China.

====Compounds====
* [[白茶]]: white tea; (rare) plain hot water as a beverage
* [[白吃饭]]: to take advantage without giving something in return
* [[白蛋白]]: [[albumin]]
* [[白鬼]]: derogatory term for a white (Caucasian) person
* [[白圭]]
* [[白话]]: vernacular Chinese
* [[白嫩]]
* [[白人]]: (literally) white person; member of the white or Caucasian race
* [[白天]]: daytime, in the daylight
* [[白日梦]]: daydream
* [[白费]]: to do something in vain; for nought
* [[白水]]: plain (hot) water
* [[白蚁]]
* [[白银]]: silver (Ag)
* [[白夜]]: midnight sun (polar regions)
* [[清白]]
* [[一青二白]]: a Chinese dish made with tofu and scallions, served as appetizer; usually used to describe things that are very clear, no repeat is required.
* [[漂白]] (piǎo bái)
** [[漂白剂]]
* [[泛白]]
* [[明白]]

[[Category:Mandarin entries with audio links|bai2]]

----

==Middle Chinese==

===Han character===
'''白''' (*bhæk)<!--note: asterisk indicates that this character appears more than four times in the Tang Dynasty corpus of literature-->

# {{defn|lang=ltc|sort=白00}}

----

==Min Nan==
{{zh-hanzi-box|白}}

===Hanzi===
{{nan-hanzi|poj=pe̍k (pek<sup>8</sup>), pe̍h (peh<sup>8</sup>)|tlpa=pi̍k (pik<sup>8</sup>), pe̍h (peh<sup>8</sup>)}}

====Pronunciation====
* {{IPA|[ peʔ˥˥ ]|lang=nan}}
* {{IPA|[ pek˥˥ ]|lang=nan}}

====Adjective====
{{nan-adj|ts|poj=pe̍h|pojt=peh8}}

# [[white]]

====Adjective====
{{nan-adj|ts|poj=pe̍k|pojt=pek8}}

# used abstractly in compound words to convey the sense of transparent, unobscured or understandable

====Usage notes====
* Read as {{term/t|nan|sc=Latn||pe̍h}} when by itself, and in most compounds.  There are only a few compounds in which the {{term/t|nan|sc=Latn||pe̍k}} reading is used.

====References====
* {{cite web
| url = http://203.64.42.21/iug/ungian/SoannTeng/chil/taihoa.asp
| title = 白
| work = On-line Taiwanese/Mandarin Dictionary (台文／華文線頂辭典)
| language = Taiwanese/English
| accessdate = 2011-01-30}}
*[http://twblg.dict.edu.tw/holodict_new/result_detail.jsp?n_no=1861&curpage=3&sample=%E7%99%BD&radiobutton=1&querytarget=1&limit=20&pagenum=5&rowcount=82 Taiwan Min Nan Common Words Dictionary (臺灣閩南語常用詞辭典)]

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
白 ([[bạch]], [[bạc]])

===Adjective===
{{head|vi|adjective}}{{attention|vi|may need inflection template}}

# [[white]]

[[Category:CJKV radicals| ]]

[[zh-min-nan:白]]
[[et:白]]
[[el:白]]
[[fr:白]]
[[ko:白]]
[[io:白]]
[[it:白]]
[[kn:白]]
[[lo:白]]
[[la:白]]
[[lv:白]]
[[lt:白]]
[[li:白]]
[[hu:白]]
[[mg:白]]
[[ms:白]]
[[ja:白]]
[[uz:白]]
[[pl:白]]
[[pt:白]]
[[ru:白]]
[[ta:白]]
[[chr:白]]
[[tr:白]]
[[uk:白]]
[[vi:白]]
[[zh:白]]