{{also|爲|为}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=86|rad=火|as=05|sn=9|four=20227|canj=IKNF}}

====Descendants====
* [[ゐ]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0669.101|dkj=18981|hdz=32198.110|uh=70BA|ud=28858|bh=ACB0|bd=44208}}

[[Category:Han characters from which hiragana were derived|ゐ]]

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=为|t2=爲}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etyl}}
{{Han simp|爲|f=爫|t=丶}}. In the oracle bone script, it is an {{Han compound|又|t1=hand|象|t2=elephant|ls=ic}} — a hand holding an animal (an elephant or a monkey). The {{zh-l|*又}} later became {{zh-l|*爪|hand; claw}}. ''{{w|Shuowen Jiezi}}'' explained the character to be a representation of the female macaque.

===Etymology===
The two pronunciations below ("to make; to do; to be", "for; to; because") are cognate; the latter is the *''-s'' derivative of the former. Words meaning "to make, to do" often have secondary meanings of "for, as" – compare {{zh-m|*作}}.

Etymology not certain. Starostin compared this word with {{cog|bo|བགྱིད་པ||to make, to manufacture}}, {{m|bo|བགྱི་བ||action, deed}}, {{m|bo|ཡིན||is, be}} and {{cog|my|ဝေ||to distribute, to share}}. Schuessler listed {{m|mkh-pro|*ʔaayh||to give}} (> {{cog|km|ឲ្យ||to give, to donate}}) and {{cog|km|ធ្វើ||to do, to make}}, although the vowels do not match.

The graphic representation using monkey or elephant probably stems a homophonic or near-homophonic etymon which was rarely attested; compare {{cog|sit-pro|*b/g-woj-n}} > {{cog|kac|woi||monkey}} and possibly {{och-l|猿|ape}}. Outside Sino-Tibetan, compare {{cog|mkh-vie-pro|*-vɔːj||elephant}} > {{cog|vi|voi||elephant}}.

===Pronunciation 1===
{{zh-pron
|m=wéi
|ma=y
|c=wai4
|h=pfs=vì
|md=ùi/ôi
|mn=ûi
|w=3hhue
|mc=y
|oc=1,1
|cat=v
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# to [[do]], to [[make]]
# {{qualifier|to turn, to transform}} [[into]], [[to]]
#* {{zh-x|分為|to divide into, to split into}}
#* {{zh-x|那 兩 個 組織 已 合併 '''為{wéi}''' 一 個 組織。|Those two organizations have been amalgamated '''into''' single one.}}
#* {{zh-x|它 將{jiāng} 重{chóng}新 結晶 '''為{wéi}''' 原來 的 結構。|It will recrystallize '''into''' the original structure.}}
#* {{zh-x|他 被 晉升 '''為{wéi}''' 上校。|He was promoted '''to''' colonel.}}
# to [[be]] {{qualifier|equivalent to|equal to}}
#* {{zh-x|失業率 '''為{wéi}''' @20%。|Unemployment '''is running''' at 20 per cent.}}
#* {{zh-x|它 的 寬度 '''為{wéi}''' 7 米。|It '''is''' 7 metres in width.}}
#* {{zh-x|一 公斤 '''為{wéi}''' 兩 磅。|A kilo '''is''' two pounds.}}
# to take something as
# to [[act]] as; to [[serve]] as; to [[behave]] as
# [[as]] (in the capacity of)

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|為法自弊|為非作歹|為害|為患|為力|為難|為盼|為期|為歉|為人|為生|為時|為首|為數|為所欲為|為伍|為限|為由|為止|為主|見義勇為}}

===Pronunciation 2===
{{zh-pron
|m=wèi
|ma=y
|c=wai6
|h=pfs=vi
|md=ôi
|mn=ūi
|w=3hhue
|oc=2,2
|cat=prep
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# [[for]]; [[to]]
#* {{zh-x|我 能 '''為{wèi}''' 你 做 點 什麼 嗎？|What can I do '''for''' you?}}
#* {{zh-x|我 真 '''為{wèi}''' 你 高興！|I am really happy '''for''' you!}}
#* {{zh-x|他 '''為{wèi}''' 自己 的 錯誤 道歉。|He gave an apology '''for''' his mistake.}}
# [[because of]]
#: {{zh-x|你 為 這 生氣 哦。|So that's what you're upset about?}}
# for the sake of
#: {{zh-usex|不.為.五.斗.米.折腰|don't bow down for the sake of five pecks (or decalitres) of rice}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|為此|為的是|為…而…|為國捐軀|為何|為虎傅翼|為虎作倀|為了|為民請命|為人作嫁|為什麼|為著/为着|為嘴傷身|因為}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=c|rs=火05|style=s|kyu=爲}}

# {{defn|lang=ja|sort=火05}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[い]] (''i'') > [[ゐ]] (''wi'')|kun=[[ため]] (''tame''), [[なる]] ([[為る]], ''naru''), [[なす]] ([[為す]], ''nasu''), [[する]] ([[為る]], ''suru''), [[たり]] (''tari''), [[つくる]] ([[為る]], ''tsukuru''), [[なり]] (''nari'')|nanori=[[びい]] (''bii'')}}

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|ため}}

# [[benefit]]
# [[sake]]; [[reason]]

====Usage notes====
The kana writing is preferred over the kanji spelling.

===Verb===
{{ja-verb|す|type=3}}

# to [[do]]

====Derived terms====
* {{ja-r|為る|する}}

====Compounds====
{{der-top}}
{{top2}}
* [[為政]] (''isei''): governing, administering
* [[為政家]] (''iseika''): politician
* [[為政者]] (''iseisha''): statesman
* [[行為]] (''kōi''): act, deed
* [[無為]] (''mui''): inactivity
{{mid2}}
* [[作為]] (''sakui''): artificiality, commission
* [[為銀]] (''tamegin''): exchange bank
* [[外為]] (''gaitame''): foreign exchange
* [[為替]] (''kawase''): money order
* [[為る]] (''naru''): become
* [[為る]] (''suru''): do
{{bottom}}
{{der-bottom}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=위}}
'''為''' ([[wi]]; hangul: [[위]])<!--hangul needs to be verified-->

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=火05}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[vi]], [[vị]]|rs=火05}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=火05}}

[[zh-min-nan:為]]
[[fr:為]]
[[ko:為]]
[[li:為]]
[[hu:為]]
[[mg:為]]
[[ja:為]]
[[pl:為]]
[[th:為]]
[[chr:為]]
[[zh:為]]