==Translingual==

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=61|rad=心|as=07|sn=11|four=2733<sub>9</sub>|canj=人火心 (OFP)|ids=⿱[[你]][[心]]}}

# [[honorific]] for '[[you]]'

===References===
* {{Han ref|kx=0388.341|dkj=10712|dj=0721.230|hdz=42301.020|uh=60A8|ud=|bh=|bd=}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=[[nei5]]|y=nei5}}

# {{defn|lang=yue|sort=心07}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=|rs=心07}}

# {{defn|lang=ja|sort=心07}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[じ]] (ji)|kun=}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Etymology===
[[你]] ("you" (2nd sg. and pl.)) + Radical: [[心]] ("heart"). Phonetically derived from 你 (ni) + Altaic genitive -yın/yin, -ün/un. This character was not listed in Sui/Tang rhyme books. First attested in Jin/Yuan-era novels, when it was also written as [[恁]] (original MC pron. ȵʑǐĕm), and occurred predominantly in attributive environments, forming complementary distribution with 你 in other cases. Originally, 您 was a pronoun for both 2nd sg. and 2nd pl., and [[你每]] (> [[你们]]) was an (equilibrating) disyllabic version of 您, which retains the -m syllable coda of 您 disappearing in Mandarin. Later, in Beijing dialect, -们 was restricted to purely a plural suffix, and 您 restricted to purely a 2nd sg. honorific pronoun, although the 2nd pl. hon. [[您们]] is still considered ungrammatical. The plural sense of 您 is retained in Tianjin dialect (as in 您了先聊，我到外头溜达溜达。 "Please continue your conversation, I'll just be having a walk outside.") and in Min [[恁]].<ref>吕叔湘 (Lü Shuxiang)，《释您，俺，咱，喒，附论们字》，in 《吕叔湘全集》第二卷 汉语语法论文集。</ref><ref>张俊阁，《近代汉语第二人称代词“您（恁）”的来源》，聊城大学学报（社会科学版），2010年第1期。</ref>

===Pronunciation===
* {{audio|zh-nín.ogg|audio}}

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[nín]] ([[nin2]])|wg=nin<sup>2</sup>}}

# {{defn|lang=cmn|sort=心07}}

===Pronoun===
{{cmn-pronoun|ts|pin=[[nín]] ([[nin2]])}}

# [[you]] (polite)

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0388.341|dkj=10712|dj=0721.230|hdz=42301.020|uh=60A8|ud=24744|bh=B17A|bd=45434}}
<references/>

[[Category:Mandarin entries with audio links]]

----

==Min Nan==

===Alternative forms===
* [[恁]]

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|[ lɪn˥˧ ]|lang=nan}}

===Pronoun===
{{nan-pronoun|ts|poj=[[lín]] (lin<sup>2</sup>)|pojt=lin2|rs=心07}}

# (''plural'') you
# {{context|possessive|lang=nan}} your

===See also===
* (''Mandarin'') {{zh-ts|你們|你们}} or ([[nǐmen]]) ''plural you''
* (''Mandarin'') [[你的]] or ([[nǐde]]) ''possessive your''

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[nâm]]|rs=心07}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=心07}}

[[da:您]]
[[fr:您]]
[[it:您]]
[[li:您]]
[[mg:您]]
[[ja:您]]
[[pl:您]]
[[fi:您]]
[[ta:您]]
[[uk:您]]
[[zh:您]]