{{also|侬}}
{{character info}}
==Translingual==

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=9|rad=人|as=13|sn=15|four=25232|canj=OTWV|ids=⿰亻農}}

====Derived characters====
* {{l|mul|[[𧁓]]}}

====References====
{{Han ref|kx=0118.250|dkj=01176|dj=0251.090|hdz=10225.040|uh=5102}}

----

==Chinese==

===Glyph origin===
{{zh-forms|s=侬|alt=人-Min,𠆧-Min Dong,農-Wu}}
{{Han etym}}
{{Han compound|人|alt1=亻|農|ls=psc|c1=s|c2=p}}.

===Etymology 1===
; “Person; I; me > ''suffix for pronouns''” in southeastern varieties

Its senses of “person; human being” and “''pronoun suffix''” are well-attested in the classical literature, dating back to the {{w|Six Dynasties}}. At the present time, traces of this word are found in various Southern regions such as [[w:Fujian|Fujian]], [[w:Jiangxi|Jiangxi]] and [[w:Zhejiang|Zhejiang]], in [[w:Wu Chinese|Wu]], [[w:Min Chinese|Min]], [[w:Huizhou Chinese|Hui]] and [[w:Gan Chinese|Gan]].

; “Person; human”
: In Coastal Min ([[w:Min Dong|Eastern]], [[w:Min Nan|Southern]] and [[w:Puxian Min|Puxian Min]]), it serves as the vernacular reading of {{och-l|人|person}}, by itself or in compounds. It is also used in [[w:zh:金衢片|Jinqu Wu]] lects (also classified as Wuzhou Wu and Chuqu Wu), usually written as {{zh-l|*農}}.

; “I”
: {{lang|zh|儂}} was used to mean “I” in medieval poetry from the Wu region, before it was displaced by the more common {{ltc-l|我|I}}. Also attested was Ancient Wu {{ltc-l|阿儂|I}}, which was abbreviated to {{zh-l|*阿|I}} in certain localities, such as that of {{w|Jinhua}}.

; “''Pronoun suffix''”
: This is widely found in Wu and Min languages. The structure ‹ ''singular pronoun'' (“I, you, he/she/it”) + {{lang|zh|儂}} › is common, with {{lang|zh|儂}} functioning either as a meaningless particle or a pluraliser. The resulting forms were thus used to mean singular or plural pronouns, and were rather prone to [[elision]] to become a single syllable. Compare the following plural pronouns in Min:

: {| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! Original word !! Meaning !! {{w|Fuding}}<br>(Eastern Min)!! {{w|Longyan}}<br>(Southern Min)!! {{w|Xiamen}}<br>(Southern Min) !! {{w|Xianyou}}<br>(Puxian Min)
|-
! {{zh-l|*我儂}} !! we
| ''ua neiŋ'' || ''gua laŋ'' || ''gun'' ({{zh-l|*阮}}) || ''kuoŋ ~ kŋ'' ({{zh-l|*滾}})
|-
! {{zh-l|*儂儂}} !! we (''inclusive'')
| - || ''laŋ laŋ'' || ''lan'' ({{zh-l|*咱}}) || -
|-
! {{zh-l|*汝儂}} !! you (''plural'')
| ''ni neiŋ'' || ''li laŋ'' || ''lin'' ({{zh-l|*恁}}) || ''tyøŋ'' ({{zh-l|*長}})
|-
! {{zh-l|*伊儂}} !! they
| ''i neiŋ'' || ''i laŋ'' || ''in'' ({{zh-l|*𪜶}}) || ''yøŋ'' ({{zh-l|*𪜶}})
|}

: A similar chain of changes happened in the Wu varieties to arrive at the modern divergent dialectal forms for “you (''singular'')”.

: {| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
|-
! colspan=3 | {{ltc-l|爾儂}}
|-
! colspan=2 | Lect !! Term
|-
| rowspan=7 | [[w:Taihu Wu|Northern]] || {{w|Fenghua}} || {{IPAchar|/n̩˧˨˦ noŋ/}}
|-
| {{w|Yuyao}} || {{IPAchar|/noŋ˩˩˧/}}
|-
| {{w|Shanghai}} || {{IPAchar|/nʊŋ˨˧/}}
|-
| {{w|Ningbo}} || {{IPAchar|/nəu˨˩˧/}}
|-
| {{w|Changshu}} || {{IPAchar|/nɛ̃˧˩/}}
|-
| {{w|Suzhou}}|| {{IPAchar|/ne̞˧˩/}}
|-
| {{w|Shengze}} || {{IPAchar|/nə˧˩/}}
|-
| rowspan=2 | Jinqu || {{w|Tangxi}} || {{IPAchar|/ŋ˨˩˩ noŋ˩˨/}}
|-
| {{w|Lanxi}} || {{IPAchar|/ŋ˥˦˦ noŋ˦˧˧/}}
|}

Some lects, such as {{w|Shanghainese}}, have merged the two syllables into one, leaving {{zh-l|儂|tr=-}} to mean “you (''singular'')”.

With regard to the etymology of this word, {{zh-ref|Huang (1980)}}, {{zh-ref|Norman (1983)}} and {{zh-ref|Zhou (1986)}} hypothesised that this is the same as {{och-l|農|farmer; peasant}}. The use of this word as a pronoun may have originated as a form of personal deprecation and then come to be used as a full-fledged pronoun. {{zh-ref|Pan and Chen (1995)}} considered this theory implausible, and proposed that this was originally a {{w|Baiyue}} substrate word, possibly of {{der|zh|qfa-tak}} origin. The initial meaning of ''nong'' was possibly a clan name, later developing to mean “person; I”. Compare {{cog|za|Nungz||''a surname''}} and name of the 11<sup>th</sup> century [[Zhuang]] leader {{w|Nong Zhigao}}, as well as the name of the {{w|Nùng}} people in Vietnam.

====Pronunciation====
{{zh-pron
|m=nóng
|c=nung4
|md=nè̤ng/nùng
|md_note=nè̤ng - vernacular; nùng - literary
|mn=ml,jj,na,ha,yc,zp,ct,ly,tw,sg,pn,ph:lâng/lông
|mn_note=lâng - vernacular; lông - literary
|mn-t=nang5/long5
|mn-t_note=nang5 - vernacular; long5 - literary
|w=3non
|mc=y
|oc=y
|mna=Taiwanese-The_Consonant_l.ogg
|cat=n,pron,pn
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{lb|zh|coastal|_|Min|dialectal Wu}} [[person]]; [[human being]] {{zh-mw|md:隻|mn:個}}
# {{lb|zh|coastal|_|Min}} a person associated with a particular [[identity]] or [[trait]]; [[-er]]
# {{lb|zh|coastal|_|Min}} [[physical]], [[psychological]] or [[moral]] [[quality]] or [[condition]]
# {{lb|zh|coastal|_|Min}} [[others]]; [[other]] [[people]]
# {{lb|zh|Wu|coastal|_|Min}} [[I]]; [[me]]
# {{lb|zh|archaic|or|Wu}} [[you]] {{q|singular}}
#: {{zh-x|儂 叫 啥 名字 啊？|What is '''your''' name?|SH|tr=3non+2qiau+2sa+3min zr+0a}}
#: {{zh-x|哪能 儂 現在 上海閒話 講 了 介 好？|How come '''you''' speak Shanghainese so well?|SH|tr=3na nen+3non+3hhi ze+3zaan he+3hhe hho+2kaan+5leq+2ka+2hau}}
# {{lb|zh|dialectal Wu}} [[he]], [[him]]; [[she]], [[her]]; [[it]]
# {{lb|zh|Min|Wu}} {{n-g|Suffix for pronouns, functioning as a meaningless particle or a pluralising particle.}}
# {{surname|zh}}. [[Nong]]

=====Usage notes=====
* {{sense|I}}
** Archaic in Wu.
** In coastal Min (Min Dong ''nè̤ng''; Hokkien ''lāng, lǎng, lâng''; Hainanese ''nang<sup>2</sup>''), it is often used affectionately like Mandarin {{zh-l|人家|rénjia}}.

=====Synonyms=====
{{zh-dial|人}}
{{zh-dial|我}}
{{zh-dial|你}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|你儂|我儂|伊儂|汝儂|咱儂|儂家|偎儂|你儂我儂|儂人|吳儂|曼儂|渠儂|儂族}}

===Etymology 2===
{{zh-forms|s=侬}}
Probably a {{der|zh|qfa-tak}} substrate word. Compare {{cog|tai-pro|*nwoːŋꟲ||younger sibling}} (whence {{cog|za|nuengx||younger sibling}}), {{cog|kmc|nongx||younger sibling}}.

====Pronunciation====
{{rfp|zh}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{lb|zh|dialectal Cantonese}} [[child]]
# {{lb|zh|dialectal Cantonese}} [[son]]
# {{lb|zh|Leizhou Min}} [[infant]]
# {{lb|zh|Hainanese|polite|humble}} {{n-g|Used as a first-person singular pronoun, especially used by someone in the younger generation.}}
#* {{zh-x|文昌河　儂 心中 的 河|Wenchang River, the river in '''my''' heart|MN-H|tr=vun2 sio1 hho2, '''nong3''' dim1 dong1 gai2 hho2|ref={{lang|zh|吴不为}}, [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sCf21Cri4Gs {{lang|zh|文昌河母亲河}}]}}
#* {{zh-x|儂 是 文昌人　儂 愛 儂 個 家鄉|'''I''' am from Wenchang. '''I''' love '''my''' hometown.|MN-H|tr='''nong3''' di5 vun2 sio1 nang2, '''nong3''' ai4 '''nong3''' gai2 ge1 hhiang1|ref='''2017''', {{lang|zh|麦英}}, [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ZGbRr4gEQw {{lang|zh|侬是文昌人}}]}}
#* {{zh-x|儂 是 海南 阿哥　老厝 佇\置 瓊海 丹嶺 村|'''I''' am Mr. Hainan, who came from Danling village in Qionghai country{{sic|county}}|MN-H|tr='''nong3''' di5 hhai3 nam2 a1 go1, lao5 su4 ddu5 heng2 hhai3 ddan1 lia3 sui1|ref='''2019''', {{lw|zh|黃明志}} ({{w|Namewee}}) ft. {{lw|zh|林俊逸}} ({{w|Sean Lin}}), [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7u8TJ6QaAmI {{lang|zh|不到海南島}}] (Lovely Hainan Island)}}
# {{lb|zh|Hainanese|affectionate}} {{n-g|A pronoun used by someone in the older generation to refer to someone in the younger generation.}}

=====Synonyms=====
{{zh-dial|小孩}}
{{zh-dial|兒子}}
{{zh-dial|嬰兒}}
{{zh-dial|我}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|細儂|儂兒|儂囝}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=|rs=人13}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=の, のう
|kanon=どう
|kanyoon=のん
|kun=わし-, かれ-
}}

====Usage notes====
This character is seldom used in modern Japanese.

===Etymology 1===
{{ja-kanjitab|yomi=k|わし|alt=私}}

Contraction of {{m|ja|私|tr=watashi||I, me}}.<ref name="KDJ">{{R:Kokugo Dai Jiten}}</ref><ref name="DJR">{{R:Daijirin}}</ref>

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|わし|acc=0|acc_ref=DJR}}

====Alternative forms====
* {{ja-l|私}} {{qualifier|more common}}

====Pronoun====
{{ja-pos|わし|pronoun}}

# {{qualifier|mainly Western Japan}} [[I]], [[me]]

=====Usage notes=====
{{wikipedia|lang=ja|老人語}}
The term is a regular pronoun in Western Japan, used primarily by men in most regions. Depending on the region, it may be used mainly by the elderly, which is especially true for women using it, and becoming more true as usage of local variants declines in younger generations. Its use is often considered stereotypical of old people in Japanese media and is frequently used in TV shows and comics to emphasize the age of characters. However, it may also simply be used to emphasize the character as hailing from [[Kansai]].

More commonly spelled {{m|ja|私}}, or in [[kana#English|kana]] to make the reading explicit.

===Etymology 2===
{{ja-kanjitab|yomi=k|かれ}}
Very rare alternative spelling. See the more common spelling {{m|ja|彼}} for more details about the term.
{{ja-see|彼}}

===References===
<references/>

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|농}}

# {{rfdef|ko|sort=人13}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-readings|reading=[[nông]], [[nùng]], [[noọng]]|rs=人13}}

# {{rfdef|vi|sort=人13}}