{{also|女子}}
{{character info}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|strokes=6}}
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=38|rad=女|as=03|sn=6|four=47447|canj=VND|ids=⿰女子}}

====Derived characters====
* {{l|mul|[[𠲡]], [[𭖝]], [[𭰕]], [[𬫓]], [[𫱪]], [[𪦟]], [[𫚻]], [[𭀿]], [[𡘏]], [[䒵]], [[孬]], [[𪥸]], [[恏]], [[𭁮]], [[𥁨]], [[𭒊]], [[𪀮]], [[𡤟]]}}

====References====
{{Han ref|kx=0255.110|dkj=06053|dj=0518.120|hdz=21028.010|uh=597D}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|alt=⿰女人,㚥,⿱女子,𡥃,𰠗,㝀,𡚽,𡥆,𢑒,𤫧,𩐔}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etyl}}
{{Han compound|女|子|t1=woman|t2=child|ls=ic}}.

The widely accepted meaning of this character is that the characters for "female" ({{l|zh|女}}) and "child" ({{l|zh|子}}) were put together to form a compound because it was good for a woman to have a child. Similarly, it has been proposed that the compound originally refers to the mutual affection between the mother and child, which then extended to mean "good". These theories are supported by the smaller {{l|zh|子}} found in some oracle bones and bronze inscriptions.

However, broader interpretations of the second character {{l|zh|子}} could lead to other theories. {{l|zh|子}} could also mean "son", so it may have meant two children, a boy and a girl next to each other, which is a good fortune to have a boy and a girl. {{l|zh|子}} could also mean "man", so it may have referred to the love between a man and a woman, which is good. {{w|Duan Yucai}}, in his annotated version of ''{{w|Shuowen}}'', interpreted it as originally referring to the beauty of {{zh-l|女子|woman}}. Lastly, it could mean that the "attitude" of a girl was considered good.

===Etymology===
The two pronunciations are cognate – pronunciation 2 is the ''*-s'' suffixed form, or exoactive/putative of pronunciation 1, literally "to consider good". Compare {{och-l|惡|id=3|[[bad]]; [[evil]]}} > {{och-l|惡|id=2|to consider [[bad]]; to [[hate]]}}.

This word has been compared with {{inh|zh|sit-pro|*hu||to raise; to rear; to nourish}}: {{cog|tbq-lob-pro|*hu³}}, Abor-Miri ({{cog|sit-tan}}) {{m|und||u}}, Mawo {{cog|cng|χu}}, which is only attested in a limited number of languages. If this is correct, it may be related to {{och-l|畜|to raise; to rear; domesticated animal}}. Alternatively, compare {{cog|bo|མཁོ||necessary, important}}.

Cognate with {{cog|bca|hux||good}}, which may be a loanword from Chinese.

===Pronunciation 1===
{{zh-pron
|m=hǎo
|ma=y
|dg=хо2
|c=hou2
|c-t=hau2
|ca=Yue-hou2.ogg
|h=pfs=hó;gd=hau3
|j=hau2
|md=hō̤
|mn=hó/qz,zz:hóⁿ
|mn-t=ho2/hoh4/hao2
|mn-t_note=ho2 - vernacular; hoh4 - vernacular (“very”); hao2 - literary
|w=2hau
|mc=1
|oc=1,1
|cat=a,adv,v,intj
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# [[good]]; [[well]]
#: {{zh-x|你 好 嗎？|How are you?}}
#: {{zh-x|你 好 嗎{maa3}？|How are you?|C}}
#: {{zh-x|真 是 個 好 主意！|That's a '''good''' idea!}}
#: {{zh-ant|壞}}
# {{n-g|Used as an interjection.}}
## [[good]]; [[very well]]; [[nice]]
## [[OK]]; [[alright]]
## [[fine]]
# [[nice]]; [[kind]]
#: {{zh-x|他們 對 我 很 好。|They are very '''kind''' to me.}}
# [[friendly]]; [[close]]; [[acquainted]]
#: {{zh-x|好 朋友|'''good''' friend}}
# to [[form]] a [[friendly]] or [[close]] [[relationship]]; to be [[friend]]s; to be [[on good terms]]
# {{lb|zh|specifically}} to [[start]] [[dating]]; to [[become]] [[romantic]] [[partner]]s
#: {{zh-x|他 倆 好 上 了。}}
# [[done]]; [[ready]]
#: {{zh-x|我 就 要 好 了。|I'll be '''ready''' very soon.}}
# to be [[good]] to; [[easy]] to
#: {{zh-x|這 水龍頭 好 擰。|This tap turns '''easily'''.}}
# (making it) [[convenient]]; [[easy]] for
#: {{zh-x|把 東西 收拾 乾淨，我 好 打掃 房間。|Put stuff away so that I can clean the room.}}
#: {{zh-x|他們 用 鏡子 反射 陽光，好 讓 救援 飛機 發現。|They used a mirror to reflect sunlight and help the search-and-rescue aircraft find them.}}
# [[so that]]
# to [[recover]] from an [[illness]]
#: {{zh-x|佢 病 咗 幾 個 月 都 仲 未 好。|He's been sick for several months and still hasn't '''recovered'''.|C}}
#: {{zh-x|好返|to get better; to recover; to heal|C}}
# {{lb|zh|somewhat|dialectal}} [[very]]; [[quite]]; [[rather]]; [[so]]
#: {{zh-x|我 好 興{xīng}奮 啊！|I'm '''so''' excited!}}
#: {{zh-x|好 幾 天|quite a few days}}
#: {{zh-x|我 個 中文{man4-2} 老師 '''好''' 好 人 㗎！|My Chinese teacher is a '''very''' nice person!|C-GZ}}
# a [[pleasure]] to (do something); [[good]] for (doing something)
#: {{zh-x|好吃|delicious}}
#: {{zh-x|好用|'''a joy to''' use}}
#: {{zh-x|好聽|'''pleasant'''-sounding}}
#: {{zh-x|呢{ni1} 把 刀 幾 好 使。|This knife is pretty '''good''' to use.|C}}
# [[properly]]; [[carefully]]
#: {{zh-x|記得 帶 好 雨具！|Remember to bring along rain gear! / Make sure your rain gear is on you!}}
#: {{zh-x|聽 好 了！|Now listen carefully!}}
# {{n-g|Particle used after verbs to denote the completion or near-completion of an action.}}
#: {{zh-x|作業 做 好 了 嗎？|Have you finished your homework?}}
# {{n-g|Used after a [[noun]] or [[pronoun]] as a [[greeting]].}}
#: {{zh-x|你.好|hello}}
#: {{zh-x|大家.好|hello, everyone}}
#: {{zh-x|老師 好|hello, teacher}}
# [[greeting]]
#: {{zh-x|問好|say hello}}
#: {{zh-x|替 我 給 你 媽 帶 個 好兒{r}。|Say hi for me to your mom.}}
# {{n-g|Particle denoting agreement, support or wish to terminate a conversation.}}
# {{n-g|Particle denoting dissatisfaction in ironical sentences.}}
# [[such]]; [[what]]
#: {{zh-x|好 一 朵 美麗 的 茉莉花。|What a beautiful jasmine.}}
# {{lb|zh|Southwestern Mandarin|Xiang}} [[how]] {{gl|to what degree}}

=====Synonyms=====
{{zh-dial|很}}
{{zh-dial|多-2}}
{{zh-dial|多麼}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|好比|好不|好不容易|好吃|好醜|好處|好處費|好歹|好的|好端端|好多|好法|好感|好過|好漢|好好|好好先生|好喝|好話|好壞|好貨|好幾|好傢伙|好景不長|好久|好看|好賴|好了傷疤忘了痛|好力寶|好臉|好馬不吃回頭草|好孬|好評|好氣|好球|好兒|好惹|好人|好人好事|好人家|好日子|好容易|好上加好|好生|好聲好氣|好使|好事|好事不出門，惡事傳千里|好事不宜遲|好事多磨|好手|好受|好說|好說歹說|好說話|好死|好似|好天|好聽|好玩|好聞|好戲|好像|好小子|好笑|好些|好心|好心不得好報|好性|好樣|好意|好意思|好用|好友|好運|好在|好找|好轉|好自為之|好走|好食|友好條約|好沒意思|不好受|好東西|不懷好意|交好|三好兩歹|好事天慳|恰到好處|好景不常|好聚好散|不好了|學好|不好啟齒|不好弄|大好|好樣子|好酒好肉|做好做歉|幸好|好夢|好癩|最好|好眼力|備受好評|做好看|做好做惡|三好兩歉|做好做歹|好語似珠|大事不好|好看錢|唱好|可知是好|好夢難圓|安好|一床兩好|不恰好|好死不死|好來寶|做歉做好|好主兒|做好事|三好兩怯|上好|好造化|和好|完好|一雙兩好|好本領|問好|好酒|好康|弄好|恰好|好景|不得好死|不識好歹|好欺負|好官|大好河山|忘年之好|好言好語|愛好兒|好不自在|天道好還|好道|好若|好搭檔|待好|好言相勸|好人難做|好缺|好朋友|嘖嘖稱好|帶個好|好兆頭|好彩頭|好書|好絕|好辦|好時好日|好言|剛好|夫婦好合|好麼|好是|好情|好夢難成|好望角|娟好|好心好意|好手如雲|完好無缺|好模好樣|嫌好道醜|嫌好道惡|嘴不好|和好如初|姣好|好體面|好頭腦|好險|好逑|好身手|好話兒|好菜|好花|好自在|好纏|好相識|好球帶|好獃|好爵|好法子|好沒生|好樣兒的|好日|好收場|好手好腳|好一日兒|好性氣|好性子|好弱|好姻緣|好大膽|好喬|好合|好半天|好剛口|好兄弟|好事多魔|好事多慳|好了歌|好主意|好一陣|好一會|好學|哥倆好|好名|也好|好籤|好早晚|好個|好鳥|大好老|好物|可不好|不論好壞|好心腸|好愻|不好惹|好萊塢|好人物|完好如初|廣受好評|好些時|好事多妨|不知好歹|好把式|只好|兩姓之好|叫好|好消息|便好道|好不好|可好|友好|不好過|多少是好|三五好友|好生意|不分好歹|不好意思|修好|倒好|兩相好|好離好散|便好|好報|好買賣|不知好歉|不好看|正好|暢好|新好男人|爛好人|相好|有話好說|有好有壞|拍手叫好|百年之好|搞不好|拿手好戲|百歲之好|有好兒|新好女人|月圓花好|滿好|秦晉之好|百年好合|示好|碰頭好兒|昆弟之好|甘言好辭|看好|瘡好忘痛|沒好氣|病好|求好心切|琴瑟之好|有個好歹|為好成歉|滿好個|燕好|濫好人|拉相好|江湖好漢|欠好|琴瑟和好|攀相好|朱陳之好|沒好意思|親朋好友|行好積德|賣好|言歸於好|言歸于好|要好|至好|隳好|絕妙好辭|總角之好|至親好友|花好月圓|頂好|綠林好漢|較好|還好|美好|討好|竹馬之好|轉看轉好|要好成歉|頂尖好手|結好|老好人|老相好|通好|重修舊好|英雄好漢|通家之好|辦好|要人好看|說好|買好|說好說歹|討好賣乖|言歸和好|見好就收|見好|良好|舊好|好家伙|汝好:lí hó|逐家好:ta̍k-ke-hó|好勢:hó-sè|拄好:tú-hó|歹竹出好筍|食好鬥相報:chia̍h hó tàu sio-pò|好空:hó-khang|好鼻獅:hó-phīⁿ-sai;Min Nan|歪喙雞食好米:oai chhùi ke chia̍h hó bí;Min Nan}}

====Descendants====
{{CJKV||こう|호|hảo}}
''Others'':
* {{desc|bor=1|vi|hẩu||kind, good, delicious}}

===Pronunciation 2===
{{zh-pron
|m=hào,a=y
|c=hou3
|h=pfs=hau;gd=hau4
|md=hó̤
|mn=hòⁿ
|mn-t=haon3
|w=2hau
|mc=2
|oc=2,2
|cat=v,pn
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# to be [[fond]] of; to [[like]]
#: {{zh-x|好{hào}學不倦|to '''like''' to learn without feeling tired}}
#: {{zh-x|餃子{zi} 多 香 啊！我 就 好{hào} 這{zhèn}麼 一 口兒{r}！|The dumplings smell so delicious! I indeed '''like''' this!|M-UIB}}
# to have a [[tendency]] to; to be [[prone]] to; [[good]] to; [[easy]] to
# {{lb|zh|dialectal Mandarin|Wu}} [[can]]; to be able to
#: {{zh-x|儂 好 流利 個 講 上海話 𠲎？|'''Can''' you speak Shanghainese fluently?|SH}}
#: {{zh-syn|會|可以}}
# {{surname|zh}}

=====Synonyms=====
{{zh-dial|喜歡}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|好吃|好大喜功|好動|好高騖遠|好客|好奇|好強|好色|好尚|好勝|好事|好為人師|好惡|好行小惠|好學|好逸惡勞|好戰|好整以暇|好事者|好謀而成|好財|不好言笑|公諸同好|好學深思|好善樂施|好弄玄虛|好色之徒|好事貪功|富而好施|好內|同好|不好|偏好|愛才好士|愛人好士|宿好|好義|好善惡惡|好勇鬥狠|好學不倦|好利|好賭|急公好義|不好說話|好貨|好問|好音|好利忘義|好鬥|富而好禮|好生惡殺|愛好|嗜好|喜好|好丹非素|好奇心|嫉惡好善|好事之徒|好辯|好賢禮士|好謀善斷|好諛惡直|好行小慧|好自矜誇|好管閒事|好生|好施樂善|好學專輯|好善嫉惡|好吃懶做|好古|好生之德|一無所好|好謀|好施小惠|好謀無斷|世好|好口|潔身自好|欽賢好士|投其所好|疾惡好善|樂善好義|爭強好勝|樂善好施|玩好|癖好|游手好閒|禮賢好士|輕財好義|篤信好古|自好|葉公好龍|輕財好士|豪俠好義|酷好|荒功好頑|貪財好賄|貪安好逸|阿其所好|輕財好施|篤學好古|阿好|遊手好閒|貪財好色|篤志好學|人之患在好為人師}}

====Descendants====
{{CJKV||こう|호|hiếu}}

===References===
* {{R:yue:Hanzi}}
* {{R:twedu|A00883}}
* {{thcwd|2282}}

{{zh-cat|Beginning|Elementary|Intermediate}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=4|rs=女03}}

# fondness; what one likes

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=こう
|kanon=こう
|kun=す-き, す-く, この-む, このみ, よ-い, よし, よしみ-, すめよい, すめよし, よろし, よろし.い
}}

====Compounds====
{{col5|ja|{{ja-r|好き|すき}}
|{{ja-r|好%物|こう%ぶつ}}
|{{ja-r|好%敵%手|こう%てき%しゅ}}
|{{ja-r|良%好|りょう%こう}}
|{{ja-r|愛%好|あい%こう}}
|{{ja-r|良%好|りょう%こう}}
|{{ja-r|友%好|ゆう%こう}}
|{{ja-r|嗜%好%品|し%こう%ひん}}
|{{ja-r|好%感|こう%かん}}
|{{ja-r|好%転|こう%てん}}
|{{ja-r|好%事|こう%ず}}
|{{ja-r|好%評|こう%ひょう}}
}}

===Proper noun===
{{ja-pos|proper|よしみ}}

# {{given name|ja|male|sort=よしみ}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=호|rv=ho|mr=ho}}

# to [[like]]

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-readings|rs=女03
|hanviet=hiếu-tdcndg;tdcntd;gdhn, hảo-tdcndg;tdcntd;gdhn
|phienthiet=呼到 hô đáo, 呼晧 hô hạo
|nom=hiếu-tdcndg;tdcntd;btcn, háu-tdcndg;gdhn;btcn, háo-tdcndg;gdhn, hảo-tdcntd;btcn, hẩu-tdcndg;gdhn, hấu-gdhn, hão-btcn, hếu-btcn
}}

# {{lb|vi|only in compound}} {{han tu form of|hiếu|to [[like]], to be [[fond]] of}}
# {{lb|vi|only in compound}} {{han tu form of|hảo|[[good]], [[well]]; [[kind]]}}
# {{lb|vi|only in [[dưa hấu]]}} {{han tu form of|hấu|[[delicious]]}}

===References===
<references/>