{{character info}}
==Translingual==

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=9|rad=人|as=06|sn=8|four=27220|canj=OBMR|ids=⿰亻同}}

====Derived characters====
* {{l|mul|[[𠍟]]}}

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0102.120|dkj=00601|dj=0216.100|hdz=10148.020|uh=4F97|ud=20375|bh=CBBE|bd=52158}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etym}}

===Pronunciation 1===
{{zh-pron
|m=tóng
|c=tung4,tung2
|mc=1
|oc=3
|ma=
|cat=n,a
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{†}} {{zh-alt-form|僮|tr=tóng|[[boy]]; [[young]] [[child]]|dot=;}} someone [[childish]] or [[ignorant]]
#* {{zh-x|在 後 之 侗{tóng}，敬迓 天威，嗣守 ^文、^武 大訓，無 敢 昏逾。|After them, I, the '''stupid''' one, received with reverence the dread (decree) of Heaven, and continued to keep the great instructions of Wen and Wu, not daring blindly to transgress them.|ref=Shangshu-L}}
# {{lb|zh|literary}} [[childish]]; [[unenlightened]]; [[ignorant]]
#* {{zh-x|^子 曰：「狂 而 不 直，侗{tóng} 而 不 愿，悾{kōng}悾{kōng} 而 不 信，吾 不 知 之 矣。」|The Master said, "Ardent and yet not upright, '''stupid''' and yet not attentive; simple and yet not sincere - such persons I do not understand."|ref=Analects}}
#* {{zh-x|侗{Tóng}-乎 其 無識，儻 乎 其 怠疑。|I was as a '''child''' who has no knowledge; I was extraordinarily slow and hesitating.|ref=Zhuangzi-L}}
#* {{zh-x|天 降 生 民，倥{kōng}侗{tóng} 顓蒙，恣 乎 情性，聰明 不 開。|When Tian gives birth to the masses, they are '''naive''' and '''ignorant'''. They give free reign to their desires and original natures, and their intelligence is undeveloped.|ref=Fayan-B}}
# {{†}} [[frivolous]]; [[flippant]]

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|倥侗|空侗|籠侗|儱侗}}

===Pronunciation 2===
{{zh-pron
|m=tǒng,tōng
|mc=2+3
|oc=1+2
|ma=
|cat=a
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{†}} [[big]]; [[long]] and [[big]]
# {{†}} [[straight]]; [[through]]
#* {{zh-x|能 舍{shě} 諸 人 而 求 諸 己 乎？能 翛然 乎？能 侗{tǒng}-然 乎？能 兒子 乎？|Can you give over thinking of other men, and seek what you want in yourself (alone)? Can you flee (from the allurements of desire)? Can you maintain an entire '''simplicity'''? Can you become a little child?|ref=Zhuangzi-L}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|侗長|侗侗}}

===Pronunciation 3===
{{zh-pron
|m=dòng
|c=dung6
|ma=
|cat=a,pn
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{†}} [[sincere]]; [[honest]] (''{{w|Jiyun}}'')
# {{w|Kam people|Dong}} {{gloss|an ethnic group in southern China}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|侗家|侗族|侗戲|侗劇|侗語}}

===References===
* {{R:yue:mfccd}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=|rs=人06}}

# {{rfdef|ja|sort=人06}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=つ
|kanon=とう
|kun=おろ-か, いた-む, かたち, なほい, まこと, つつし-む}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=동|rv=dong|mr=tong}}

# {{rfdef|ko|sort=人06}}