==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=39|rad=子|as=00|sn=3|four=1740<sub>7</sub>|canj=弓木 (ND|ids=⿻[[了]][[一]])}}

# [[offspring]], [[child]], [[son]], [[daughter]]
# [[fruit]], [[seed]] of
# the first sign (rat) of the [[Wikipedia:Chinese zodiac|Chinese zodiac]]
# [[master]], e.g. Kongzi and Laozi meaning "Master Kong" and "Master Lao"

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0277.010|dkj=06930|dj=0543.150|hdz=21006.060|uh=5B50|ud=23376|bh=A46C|bd=42092}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=[[zi2]]|y=[[ji2]]}}

# {{defn|Cantonese|sort=子00}}

----

==Japanese==

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|k|hira=こ|rom=ko}}

# [[child]]
#: ''[[男]]の'''子'''。''
#:: ''[[おとこ]]の'''こ'''。''
#:: ''[[otoko|Otoko]] no '''ko'''。''
#::: A [[male]] '''child'''.
# some [[object]] which has a [[subservient]] or [[derivative]] role relative to another object
#: ''[[子会社|'''子'''会社]]。''
#:: '''''こ'''[[かいしゃ|がいしゃ]]。''
#:: '''''Ko'''[[kaisha|gaisha]]。''
#::: A [[subsidiary]].
# an [[object]] of such a [[state]] or [[property]]
#: ''[[振]]'''子'''。''
#:: ''[[ふり]]'''こ'''。''
#:: ''[[furi|Furi]]'''ko'''。''
#::: a [[pendulum]]: an object that swings.
# roe (only when preceded by a fish, or fish-related prefix)
#: ''明太子''
#: ''飛び子''

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=1|rs=子00}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[し]] ([[shi]]), [[す]] ([[su]])|kun=[[こ]] ([[ko]]), [[ね]] ([[ne]])}}

====Compounds====
* [[綿菓子]] ([[わたがし]], [[watagashi]]) [[cotton candy]]
* [[子ども]] ([[子供]], [[こども]], [[kodomo]]) a [[child]]
* [[お子さん]] ([[おこさん]], [[okosan]]) your/someone's [[child]]
* {{term|子犬||[[puppy]]|tr=[[こいぬ]], [[koinu]]|sc=Jpan|lang=ja}}
* [[電子]] ([[でんし]], [[denshi]]): an [[electron]]
* [[電子メール]] ([[でんしめーる]], [[denshi-mēru]]): [[e-mail]]
* [[電子レンジ]] ([[でんしれんじ]], [[denshi-renji]]): [[microwave oven]]
* [[電子辞書]] ([[でんしじしょ]], [[denshi-jisho]]): [[electronic dictionary]]
* [[帽子]] ([[ぼうし ]], [[bōshi]]): [[hat]]

===Names===
{{rfc-header|Names|lang=ja}}
* suffix used by female given names, such as 智子(ともこ, Tomoko), 英子(えいこ, Eiko; ひでこ, Hideko), 美奈子(みなこ, Minako).
* {{rare|lang=ja}} suffix used by male given names.

[[Category:ja:Family|こ]]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=자|eumhun=아들|rv=ja|mr=cha}}

# {{defn|Korean|sort=子00}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=[[zǐ]] ([[zi3]])|wg=[[tzu3|tzu<sup>3</sup>]]}}

# {{defn|Mandarin|sort=子00}}

====Compounds====
* [[椰子]]
* [[子彈]]
* [[繩子]], [[绳子]] (shéngzi)
* [[覆盆子]]
* [[杜松子]]
* [[山楂]]子
* [[使君子]]
* [[附子]]
* [[香附子]]
* [[五倍子]]
* [[大风子]]
* [[车前子]]
* [[枸杞子]]
* [[蛇床子]]
* [[蛇麻子]]
* [[菟丝子]]
* [[葛缕子]]
* [[众香子]]
* [[没食子]]
* [[白芥子]]
* [[蓖麻子]]
* [[女贞子]]
* [[伪君子]]

----

==Middle Chinese==

===Han character===
'''子''' (*tziə̌)<!--asterisk signifies that this is a reconstructed pronunciation-->

# {{defn|Middle Chinese|sort=子00}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[tử]], [[tí]], [[tở]]|rs=子00}}

# {{defn|Vietnamese|sort=子00}}

[[fr:子]]
[[ko:子]]
[[it:子]]
[[sw:子]]
[[lo:子]]
[[la:子]]
[[lt:子]]
[[li:子]]
[[hu:子]]
[[mg:子]]
[[ms:子]]
[[ja:子]]
[[km:子]]
[[pl:子]]
[[pt:子]]
[[ru:子]]
[[sv:子]]
[[tr:子]]
[[uk:子]]
[[vi:子]]
[[zh:子]]