{{also|鬥}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=68|rad=斗|as=00|sn=4|four=3400<sub>0</sub>|canj=卜十 (YJ)}}

====Derived characters====
* [[料]] [[斛]] [[斡]] [[魁]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0477.240|dkj=13489|dj=0835.270|hdz=32252.010|uh=6597|ud=26007|bh=A4E6|bd=42214}}

----

==Chinese==

===Etymology===
Pronunciations 1 ("dipper, ladle") and 2 ("water ladle") are cognate. They probably belong to the same word family as {{Hani|[[注]]}} (''zhù'' < OC *''tro-s'' (B-S) or *''tjos'' (ZS), "to pour"), as a derived noun. Within Sino-Tibetan, compare Tibetan {{term|ཆུ|lang=bo|sc=Tibt|tr=chu||water}}, {{term|འཆུ་བ|lang=bo|sc=Tibt|tr='chu ba||to scoop up, to ladle water}}, {{term|བཅུས་པ|lang=bo|sc=Tibt|tr=bcus ba||to scoop up, to ladle water}}.

Pronunciation 3 ("to fight") is probably from Proto-Sino-Tibetan {{recons|daw|lang=sit-pro||defy, interfere, be at enmity with}}, which is  the source of Tibetan {{term|སྡོ་བ|lang=bo|sc=Tibt|tr=sdo ba||risk, hazard, venture; to bear up against, bid defiance}} and Burmese {{term|တော့|lang=my|sc=Mymr|tr=tau.||to resent an insinuation, interfere in a quarrel}}. 斗 (pronunciation 3) is also a variant form of {{Hani|[[鬭]]}} (''dòu'' < OC *''tˁok-s'' (B-S) or *''toːɡs'' (ZS), "to meet, to encounter"), see there for more.

===Hanzi===
{{zh-pron|1|dipper, ladle|toːʔ|tˁoʔ|təuˣ|dǒu|toʊ̯²¹⁴|dau2|tɐu³⁵|tɜ³⁴|[[táu]] (''colloquial''), [[tó͘]] (''literary'')|[[と]], [[とう]]|[[두]]|đẩu}}
{{cmn-hanzi|tra=斗|pin=[[dǒu]] ([[dou3]])|wg=tou<sup>3</sup>}}

# a [[dipper]] or [[cup]]-like object, used in ancient China as a wine vessel.
#:[[斗量]] ("to measure with ''dou'', numerous"), [[斗筲]] ("''dou'' and ''xiao'', humble, insignificant")
# a unit of measure based on ''dou''.
#:[[升斗]] ("''sheng'' and ''dou'', a small amount")
# a unit of dry measure (for grains, especially rice) roughly equal to 1 [[decaliter]].
# any ''dou''-shaped object; [[dipper]], [[ladle]].
#:[[漏斗]] ("funnel"), [[烟斗]] ("tobacco pipe"), [[熨斗]] ("flatiron"), [[风斗]] ("wind scoop"), [[水斗]] ("water ladle"), [[墨斗]] ("carpenter's ink marker"), [[抽斗]] ("drawer"), [[斗笠]] ("wide-brimmed rain hat"), [[斗篷]] ("cape, cloak")
# ([[刁斗]]) [[cauldron]], [[cymbal]]
# (round or spiral shaped) [[fingerprint]], [[dactylogram]]
# ([[枓]], [[斗拱]]) {{architecture|lang=cmn}} the system of [[wood]] [[bracket]]s on the top of a [[column]] supporting the [[crossbeam]]
# {{figurative|lang=cmn}} [[small]], [[short]], [[narrow]]
#:[[斗室]] ("small room")
# {{figurative|lang=cmn}} [[big]], [[high]], to be [[full]] of
#:[[斗胆]] ("venture; boldly")
# ([[北斗]], [[北斗七星]]) The [[Big Dipper]], an [[asterism]] of seven stars.
#:[[星移斗转]] / [[斗转星移]] ("passage of time"), [[泰斗]] ("the leading authority")
# [[star]]s in general.
#:[[星斗]] ("stars")
# ([[斗宿]]) The {{w|Dipper (Chinese constellation)}}, one of the twenty-eight [[mansion]]s of the Chinese constellations.
# ([[南斗]]) a subconstellation of the above mansion, consisting of six stars.
# ([[小北斗]]) The [[Little Dipper]], a constellation of six stars.
# [[w:zh:斗 (星官)|a Chinese constellation]] consisting of five stars.
# ([[斗姆]]) [[w:zh:斗姆|''Doumu'']], a [[goddess]] in [[Taoism]].
# {{w|Radical 68}}, a Chinese character radical.
# [[rebus]] character for [[陡]]: [[steep]], [[cliffy]]
# [[rebus]] character for [[陡]]: [[suddenly]], [[in a sudden]]
# [[rebus]] character for [[抖]]: to [[tremble]], to [[shake]] off
# see [[科斗]] (alternative form of [[蝌蚪]] ("tadpole")).
----
{{zh-pron|2|water ladle|toʔ|toʔ|ʨɨoˣ|zhǔ|ʈʂu²¹⁴}}
{{cmn-hanzi|tra=斗|pin=[[zhǔ]] ([[zhu3]])|wg=chu<sup>3</sup>}}
# ([[枓]]) [[ladle]] or [[spoon]] used for [[scooping]] water.
# a unit of measure for liquids.
# [[rebus]] character for [[主]]: [[master]], [[God]].
{{-}}
----
{{zh-pron|3|to fight|toːɡs|tˁok-s|BSunlisted=y|təuᴴ|dòu|audiocmn=zh-dòu.ogg|toʊ̯⁵¹|dau3|tɐu³³|tɜ³⁴|[[tàu]] (''colloquial''), [[tò͘]] (''literary'')|[[と]], [[とう]]|[[두]], [[투]]|đấu}}
{{cmn-hanzi|tra=[[鬥]] or '''斗'''|pin=[[dòu]] ([[dou4]])|wg=tou<sup>4</sup>}}
# to [[fight]], to [[struggle]]
#:[[争斗]] ("to fight"), [[战斗]] ("battle"), [[械斗]] ("to fight with weapons"), [[拳斗]] ("fist fight"), [[格斗]] ("grapple"), [[搏斗]] ("to wrestle"), [[明争暗斗]] ("both open strife and veiled struggle"), [[龙争虎斗]] ("fierce struggle between two evenly-matched opponents"), [[角斗]] ("to battle"), [[斗士]] ("warrior"), [[斗志]] ("morale"), [[斗殴]] ("to brawl"), [[斗气]] ("to quarrel just to vent one's spleen"), [[斗舰]] ("man-of-war")
# to make (animal) fight
#:[[斗鸡]] ("cockfighting"), [[斗牛]] ("bull-fight"), [[斗鸡眼]] ("cross-eye")
# to [[contend]], to [[compete]] with
#:[[斗争]] ("conflict"), [[斗智]] ("contest of wits"), [[斗嘴]] ("to squabble"), [[批斗]] ("to criticize and denounce a person")
# to [[strive]] one's best
#:[[奋斗]] ("to work at one's utmost")
# {{archaic|lang=cmn}} (of stars) to [[collide]] with each other
# [[chaotic]], [[disorderly]], [[helter-skelter]]
# to [[take]] the [[opportunity]] to ..., to do something while it's ...
# to [[face]], to [[confront]], to [[front]], to be [[opposite]]
# to [[encounter]], to [[face]]
# to [[piece]] together, to [[fit]] together
# [[fine]] [[tea]], tea of the best quality
# {{dialectal|lang=cmn}} [[bird]] [[nest]]
# [[rebus]] character for [[逗]]: to [[tease]], to [[play]] with
# [[rebus]] character for [[兜]]: to [[solicit]] (customers or business)
# [[rebus]] character for [[陡]]: [[suddenly]], [[in a sudden]]
# a Chinese surname.

===Compounds===
* [[阿斗]] ("nickname for {{w|Liu Shan}}; a fool")
* [[筋斗]] ("somersault")

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=c|rs=斗00}}

# {{defn|lang=ja|sort=斗00}}

====Readings====
* {{ja-readings|on=[[と]] (to), [[とう]] (tō)|kun=[[とます]] (tomasu), [[ます]] (masu), [[ひしゃく]] (hishaku)}}

====Compounds====
{{top2}}
* [[北斗]]
{{bottom}}

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=두|eumhun=|rv=du|mr=tu|y=twu}}

# ([[말]] 두): [[measure]] of about 18 [[liter]]s; such measuring vessel 
# ([[조두]] 두): [[cauldron]]; [[cymbal]] 
# ([[구기]] 두): [[dipper]], [[ladle]] 
# ([[별]][[이름]] 두): [[asterism]] around [[Polaris]] such as [[Big Dipper]] and [[Little Dipper]]

===Synonyms===
* {{sense|cauldron}} [[刁]]

===Related terms===
* [[升]] ([[승]], ''seung'')
* [[合]] ([[홉]], ''hob'')

===Compounds===
{{top2}}
* [[大斗]] ([[대두]], ''daedu'')
* [[小斗]] ([[소두]], ''sodu'')
* [[刁斗]] ([[조두]], ''jodu'')
{{mid2}}
* [[北斗]] ([[북두]], ''bugdu'')
* [[南斗]] ([[남두]], ''namdu'')
{{bottom}}

===References===
* [http://www.toegye.ne.kr/dic/read_dic.asp?table=board&page=1&m_no=4471&str1=2&str2=%E5%88%81 斗 (국제퇴계학회)] 

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[đẩu]], [[đấu]], [[điếu]], [[tẩu]]|rs=斗00}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=斗00}}

[[Category:CJKV radicals]]

[[fr:斗]]
[[ko:斗]]
[[li:斗]]
[[hu:斗]]
[[mg:斗]]
[[ms:斗]]
[[ja:斗]]
[[pl:斗]]
[[ru:斗]]
[[zh:斗]]