{{zh-hanzi|{{zh-lookup|他}}}}
{{also|她|祂|牠|ta}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Phonosemantic interpretation===

[[w:Old_Chinese|Old Chinese]] [[w:Old_Chinese_phonology#Initials|Initial]] {{IPAchar|/*t-/}} lends semantic value '''Straight'''. [[w:Old_Chinese_phonology#Tones_and_final_consonants|Final consonant]] {{IPAchar|/*-r/}} lends semantic value '''Continuum'''.
[[w:Chinese_character_classification#Phono-semantic_compound_characters|Phono-semantic indicator]] [[也]] (stretch horizontally) + [[w:Radical_(Chinese_character)#Semantic_elements|semantic indicator]] [[人]] person → drag another person along the ground → other.
Source: [http://www.kanjinetworks.com/eng/kanji-dictionary/online-kanji-etymology-dictionary.cfm?kanji_id=TAR01 Howell & Morimoto]

===Etymology===
From [[人]] ‘person’ + [[也]] ‘also’.

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=9|rad=人|as=03|sn=5|four=2421<sub>2</sub>|canj=人心木 (OPD)|ids=⿰[[亻]][[也]]}}

# [[other]], [[another]]
# [[he]], [[she]], [[it]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0092.090|dkj=00370|dj=0195.120|hdz=10115.060|uh=4ED6|ud=20182|bh=A54C|bd=42316}}

----

==Cantonese==

===Hanzi===
{{yue-hanzi|jyut=taa1|y=ta1}}

====Compounds====
{{top2}}
* [[他們]] they (masculine)
* [[他們的]] their (masculine)
{{mid2}}
* [[他們自己]] themselves (masculine)
* [[吉他]] guitar
{{bottom}}

===Pronoun===
{{head|yue|pronoun|traditional and simplified||jyutping|taa1}}

# [[he]]; [[him]]
# [[other]]; [[another]]

====Synonyms====
* [[她]], [[祂]], [[牠]], [[它]], [[佢]]

----

==Hmong==

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|hmn|}}

# third person prounoun: [[he]], [[him]]

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=3|rs=人03}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|on=[[た]] ([[ta]])
|kun=[[ほか]] ([[hoka]])
}}

====Compounds====
{{der-top|Compounds}}
* [[他意]] another meaning (for one's behavior or speech)
* [[他界]] the world after death
* [[他殺]] [[murder]]
* [[他動詞]] [[transitive verb]]
* [[他人]] [[unrelated]] [[person]]
* [[他愛]] altruism
* [[他家]]
* [[他覚症]]
* [[他覚的]]
* [[他郷]]
* [[他見]]
* [[他言]] telling the other persons
* [[他行]]
* [[他国]] the other country
* [[他山]]
* [[他事]]
* [[他社]] the other company
{{der-mid}}
* [[他者]]
* [[他出]]
* [[他所]]
* [[他称]]
* [[他心]]
* [[他生]]
* [[他薦]]
* [[他念]]
* [[他派]]
* [[他物]]
* [[他聞]]
* [[他方]]
* [[他面]]
* [[他律]]
* [[他流]]
* [[他力]]
{{bottom}}

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|k|hira=ほか|rom=hoka}}

{{ja-noun|k|hira=た|rom=ta}}

# [[another]], [[other]], some other
#* この'''他'''にも行き先がありますか。<br
/> この'''ほか'''にもゆきさきがありますか。<br
/> Kono '''hoka''' ni mo yukisaki ga arimasuka?<br
/> Do you have any '''other''' destinations?
#* この事業は'''他'''を利するために開始されました。<br
/> このじぎょうは'''た'''をりするためにかいしされました。<br
/> Kono jigyō wa '''ta''' o ri suru tame ni kaishi saremashita.<br
/> This project was started in order to benefit '''others'''.

====Related terms====
* [[他ならぬ]]
* [[その他]]

====Idioms====
* 他でもない<br>ほかでもない<br>''hoka demo nai''<br>What I want to say to you is...

* 他に[[累]]を[[及ぼす]]<br>たにるいをおよぼす<br>''ta ni rui o oyobosu''<br>involve others in trouble

* 他に[[例]]を[[見る|見ない]]<br>たにれいをみない<br>''ta ni rei o minai''<br>unparalleled; incomparable

* 他の[[言]]に[[惑う|惑わされる]]<br>たのげんにまどわされる<br>''ta no gen ni madowasareru''<br>be led astray by others' opinions

[[Category:Japanese nouns|ほか]]
[[Category:Japanese terms written with one Han script character]]
[[Category:Japanese terms spelled with 他]]
----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=[[타]]|rv=ta|mr=t'a}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=人03}}

----

==Mandarin==

===Pronunciation===
* {{IPA|/tʰa˥/|lang=cmn}}
* {{audio|zh-tā.ogg|audio}}

===Pronoun===
{{cmn-pronoun|ts|pin=tā|pint=ta1|rs=人03}}

# [[he]]; [[him]]
#* [http://wordproject.org/multi/bi_en_cn_py.htm John 1.3]
#*: 万物是借着'''他'''造的。凡被造的，没有一样不是借着他造的。
#*: Wànwù shì jièzhe '''tā''' zào de. Fán beì zào de, méiyǒu yīyàng búshì jièzhe tā zào de.
#*:: All things were made by '''him'''; and without him was not any thing made that was made. 
# [[other]]; [[another]]

====Synonyms====
* [[她]], [[祂]], [[牠]], [[它]]

===Hanzi===
{{cmn-hanzi|pin=tā|wg=t'a<sup>1</sup>}}
#* [http://wordproject.org/multi/bi_en_cn_py.htm John 1.7]
#*: 这人来，为要作见证，就是为光作见证，叫众人因'''他'''可以信。
#*: Zhè rén lái, wèi yào zuò jiànzhèng, jiùshì wèi guāng zuò jiànzhèng, jiào zhòngrén yīn '''tā''' kĕyǐ xìn.
#*:: The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through '''him''' might believe. 

====Compounds====
{{top2}}
* [[他妈的]]
* [[他们]]
* [[他人]]
* [[他日]]
{{mid2}}
* [[他杀]]
* [[他乡]]
* [[吉他]]
{{bottom}}

[[Category:Mandarin entries with audio links]]
[[Category:cmn:Beginning Mandarin in simplified script|ta1]]
[[Category:cmn:Beginning Mandarin in traditional script|人03他]]

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[tha]], [[thà]], [[thè]], [[thơ]]|rs=人03}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=人03}}

====References====
*[http://nomfoundation.org/common/nom_details.php?codepoint=4ed6 Nom Foundation]

[[da:他]]
[[es:他]]
[[fr:他]]
[[ko:他]]
[[it:他]]
[[lo:他]]
[[lt:他]]
[[li:他]]
[[hu:他]]
[[mg:他]]
[[ms:他]]
[[fj:他]]
[[nl:他]]
[[ja:他]]
[[pl:他]]
[[pt:他]]
[[ru:他]]
[[fi:他]]
[[ta:他]]
[[uk:他]]
[[vi:他]]
[[zh:他]]